T H E
C A P I T A L I S T
M A N I F E S T O
by Louis O. Kelso
and Mortimer J. Adler
AS PUBLISHED BY
RANDOM HOUSE
New York
1958
2
© Copyright, 2000, by Patricia H. Kelso.
All rights reserved under International and Pan American Copy-
right Conventions.
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 58-5268
Published in San Francisco and simultaneously on the Internet
by the Kelso Institute.
www.kelsoinstitute.org
3
PREFACE
While signing my name to THE CAPITALIST MANIFESTO as coau-
thor with Louis Kelso, I wish to disclaim any credit for the original
and basic theory of capitalism on which this Manifesto is based.
That theory is entirely Mr. Kelso’s. It is the product of many years
of inquiry and thought on his part. The full statement of it will
soon be published in Capitalism, of which Mr. Kelso is sole author.
I would also like to explain how I came to appreciate the criti-
cal importance of the theory of capitalism; and why I felt that its
revolutionary insights and program should be briefly summarized
in the form of a manifesto addressed to all Americans who are
concerned with the future of a democratic society, with the
achievement of the fullest freedom and justice for all men, and,
above all, with a twentieth-century reinterpretation of everyone’s
right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.
In the twenty years or more in which I have been developing a
theory of democracy as the only perfectly just form of government,
I slowly came to realize that political democracy cannot flourish
under all economic conditions. Democracy requires an economic
4
system which supports the political ideals of liberty and equality for
all. Men cannot exercise freedom in the political sphere when they
are deprived of it in the economic sphere.
John Adams and Alexander Hamilton observed that a man
who is dependent for his subsistence on the arbitrary will of an-
other man is not economically free and so should not be admitted
to citizenship because he cannot use the political liberty which be-
longs to that status. If they had stated this point as a prediction, it
would have been confirmed by later historic facts. The progressive
political enfranchisement of the working classes has followed their
progressive economic emancipation from slavery and serfdom, or
from abject dependence on their employers.
As I first saw the problem, it came to this: What is the eco-
nomic counterpart of political democracy? What type of economic
organization is needed to support the institutions of a politically
free society? The answer suggests itself at once, at least verbally:
“economic democracy.” But we do not really have an answer
unless we can give concrete meaning to those words.
We begin to form some notion of the economic counterpart of
political democracy, or of the economic substructure needed to
support free political institutions, when we recognize that it must
involve two things: (1) economic liberty, i.e., the abolition of all eco-
nomic slavery, servitude, or dependence; and (2) economic equality,
i.e., the enjoyment by all men of the same economic status and,
therewith, of the same opportunities to live well.
But what do we mean by the abolition of all forms of eco-
nomic servitude or dependence? Certainly, that no man should
work as a slave. But that by itself would hardly seem to be enough.
In the whole of the pre-industrial past, economic freedom was
thought to depend on the possession of sufficient property to en-
able a man to obtain subsistence for himself and his family without
recourse to grinding toil.
5
In the oligarchical republics or feudal aristocracies of the past,
the few who enjoyed the political freedom of citizenship or noble
rank were always men of relatively independent means. The princi-
ple of universal suffrage in our democratic republic now confers
the political freedom of citizenship on all. If that is effective only
when it is accompanied by economic freedom, are we called on to
envisage a society in which all men will have the same kind of eco-
nomic independence and security that only the few enjoyed in the
past?
The question of what is meant by economic equality is even more
difficult. We can be sure of only one thing. Economic equality
cannot mean equality of possessions any more than political equality
means equality of functions. Yet if we proceed by analogy with the
ideal of political democracy, which we conceive as a politically
classless society with a rotating aristocracy of leaders, we can at
least surmise that an economic democracy must somehow be con-
ceived as an economically classless society, and that, too, with a
rotating aristocracy of managers.
Until very recently, as I thought about these questions, I had
grave doubts that what has come to be called “capitalism” could
establish the kind of economic democracy which political democ-
racy required as its counterpart. I now understand the reasons for
my doubts. They were based on an understanding of “capitalism”
which was colored by the sound criticisms that had been leveled
against its injustices and inequities, not only by Marx and Engels,
and by socialists generally, but also by Popes Leo XIII and Pius XI,
and by social philosophers or reformers as diverse as Alexis de
Tocqueville, Horace Mann, Henry George, Theodore Roosevelt,
Woodrow Wilson, Hilaire Belloc, Jacques Maritain, Amintore Fan-
fani, and Karl Polanyi. Of these, only Marx, Engels and their fol-
lowers proposed communism as the remedy.
What all these men were criticizing was nineteenth-century capital-
ism as it existed in England and the United States, the two countries in
6
the world most advanced industrially. That nineteenth-century
capitalism was unjust, no one can question. But there is a question
as to whether nineteenth-century capitalism conforms to the idea
or ideal of capitalism; and with this goes the question whether the
historic injustices committed by the capitalism of the nineteenth
century are historic accidents or are intrinsic to the very idea of
capitalism itself.
Ten years ago, at a time when I did not understand the idea or
ideal of capitalism as something quite different from what existed
under that name in the nineteenth century, I naturally tended to
suppose that the economic injustices perpetrated in the nineteenth
century were intrinsic to capitalism. If that were so, then they could
not be remedied without giving up capitalism itself, and finding
some alternative to it—socialism, a co-operative system, a corpora-
tive order, or something else.
In that state of mind, I was also bothered by the fact that the
very expression I had been forced to use in order to give some
meaning to economic democracy—the expression “classless soci-
ety”—was the slogan and banner of the communists. The Commu-
nist Manifesto called for the overthrow of the class-structured bour-
geois society, divided into owners and workers, oppressors and
oppressed, and set before men’s minds the ideal of a classless soci-
ety, achieved through the dictatorship of the proletariat, in which
the state itself would be the sole owner of the means of produc-
tion, and all men would be “equally liable to labor.”
I could not help agreeing with those who pointed out the fatal
flaws in the communists’ revolutionary program. If men are de-
pendent for their subsistence upon the arbitrary will of the state, or
on that of its bureaucrats who manage the state-owned means of
production, they are as unfree economically as when they are de-
pendent upon the arbitrary will of private owners. Furthermore,
“the equal liability of all to labor,” which is a basic principle in the
communist program, impedes rather than promotes economic
7
freedom. The communist classless society is, therefore, hardly the
economic democracy we are looking for as the counterpart of po-
litical democracy.
But while proponents of capitalism have argued against com-
munism as the foe of political liberty and quality, they have not
offered a positive program for establishing an economically class-
less society. They have not countered the call for a communist
revolution by proposing a capitalist revolution which, by carrying
out the true principles of capitalism, would produce the economic
democracy we need as the basis for political democracy.
One other fact obscured my understanding of the problem, or
at least led me to consider a wrong solution of it. That was the ex-
traordinary change which had taken place in the American econ-
omy during my lifetime. Beginning with Theodore Roosevelt and
Woodrow Wilson, and running through all the administrations of
Franklin Roosevelt and his successors, Republican as well as De-
mocratic, capitalism in twentieth-century America has undergone a
remarkable transformation which puzzles many European observ-
ers who cannot understand precisely how America has managed to
remain a capitalist country, and yet has succeeded in avoiding the
Marxist prediction that capitalism would be destroyed by its own
imbalance between production and consumption. Or, to put it an-
other way, they wonder whether capitalism in twentieth-century
American is still capitalism in essence. They suspect that it is really one
of the “many paths to socialism.”
This suspicion is not unfamiliar to Americans. Many of them,
especially the most outspoken opponents of the New Deal, have
voiced it themselves. They have deplored, again and again, the
“creeping socialism” which has been eroding, if not overthrowing,
the institutions and principles of capitalism. If the charge of creep-
ing socialism is correct, then it can be argued that America has
produced an economy which supports political democracy only by
gradually, and perhaps self-deceptively, substituting socialist for
8
capitalist principles. What is true of America is also true of Eng-
land, with a little less self-deception in the latter case.
To understand the charge of “creeping socialism,” one need
only make a check-list out of the ten-point program which Marx
and Engels proposed in 1848 and which they described as a way of
making progressive “inroads on the rights of property, and on the
conditions of bourgeois production.” The measures they proposed
for “socializing” the economy by wresting “all capital from the
bourgeoisie” and centralizing “all instruments of production in the
hands of the State,” are as follows:
1. Abolition of property in land and application of all rents of
land to public purposes.
2. A heavy progressive or graduated income tax.
3. Abolition of all right of inheritance.
4. Confiscation of the property of all emigrants and rebels.
5. Centralization of credit in the hands of the State, by means
of a national bank with State capital and an exclusive mo-
nopoly.
6. Centralization of the means of communication and trans-
port in the hands of the State.
7. Extension of factories and instruments of production
owned by the State; the bringing into cultivation of waste
lands, and the improvement of the soil generally in accor-
dance with a common plan.
8. Equal liability of all to labor. Establishment of industrial
armies, especially for agriculture.
9. Combination of agriculture with manufacturing industries;
gradual abolition of the distinction between town and
country, by a more equable distribution of population over
the country.
9
10. Free education for all children in public schools. Abolition
of children’s factory labor in its present form. Combination
of education with industrial production, etc., etc.
In his recent book, Contemporary Capitalism, John Strachey, the
leading English Marxist, refers to the industrial economy of the
mid-nineteenth century as “early stage capitalism.” That was capi-
talism prior to political democracy, prior to the technological ad-
vances which accelerated capitalization, and prior to the enactment,
in whole or in part, of the revolutionary measures proposed by
Marx and Engels.
Strachey refers to contemporary capitalism—the capitalism of England
and the United States in the middle of the twentieth century—as
“latest stage capitalism.” That is not only a technologically advanced
economy with ever increasing accumulations of capital. It is not only
a capitalistic system that is being operated by a democratic society. It
is also, in Strachey’s judgment, a partly socialized capitalism which
has been brought into being by the legislative enactment of much of
the Marxist program and without the violent revolution Marx
thought would be necessary. But in his view it is a revolution none-
theless—a revolution still in process, the ultimate goal of which, ac-
cording to his projection, is “last stage capitalism,” or the completely
socialized industrial economy in which the State is the only capitalist.
Strachey’s account of what has happened in the last hundred
years is not far from the truth. The radical differences he points
out between “early stage” and “latest stage” capitalism are unques-
tionable. His description of the present economy of England and
the United States as partly socialized capitalism is accurate. But his
notion that the process of socialization must be completed to re-
move the inherent conflicts between capitalism and democracy is
as wrong as it can be.
The socialization of the economy can be completed, according
to Strachey, only when the abolition of private property in the
10
means of production replaces the present highly attenuated private
ownership of capital. But when that happens, all capital property
must be vested in the State; and then, as Milovan Djilas has
pointed out, you have a new class of “owners”? the bureaucrats
who form the managerial class in a totalitarian state. Djilas’s book,
The New Class, offers irrefutable evidence that a completely social-
ized economy, far from creating a free and classless society, creates
one in which there is sharp class division between the rulers who
are, in effect, the owners and the workers who are economically as
well as politically enslaved. In the light of it, we can see clearly that
it is socialism, not capitalism, which is essentially incompatible with
democracy.
For many years I was prone to some of the errors and fallacies
which blind socialists to the truth about capitalism and democracy.
They are shared by many Americans, including our leading econo-
mists, who, while they would not go as far as Strachey, nevertheless
think that the progressive socialization of the economy during the
last fifty years has been an advance toward the ideal of the democ-
ratic society. It was precisely these errors in my own thinking
which made me doubt that capitalism as such (i.e., not creeping
socialism disguised as capitalism) could create the economic de-
mocracy—the economically free and classless society—which
would provide the very soil and atmosphere in which political de-
mocracy can prosper.
These errors remained with me until I became acquainted with
the thought of Louis Kelso. According to Mr. Kelso’s theory, capi-
talism perfected in the line of its own principles, and without any
admixture of socialism, can create the economically free and class-
less society which will support political democracy and which,
above all, will help us to preserve the institutions of a free society.
In what we have become accustomed to call “the world-wide
struggle for men’s minds,” this conception of capitalism offers the
only real alternative to communism, for our partly socialized capi-
11
talism is an unstable mixture of conflicting principles, a halfway
house from which we must go forward in one direction or the
other.
No one with any sense of justice or devotion to democracy
would wish to go back to capitalism in its original or primitive
form. No one with any sense of the scientific-industrial revolution
that is just beginning, and which will transform our society in the
next hundred years, would regard our present partly capitalistic and
partly socialistic arrangements as constituting a system that is capa-
ble of maintaining itself statically in spite of its obviously unstable
equilibrium between two opposing forces.
One is the tendency toward socialization and the attenuation of
property rights in capital. The other is the effort to retain the ves-
tiges of private property in capital. In one direction lies the goal of
the socialist or communist revolution. In the other, by means of
giving full strength to the rights of private property in capital while
at the same time harmonizing those rights with the applicable prin-
ciples of economic justice, lies the goal of the capitalist revolution.
The latter is clearly the better of the two revolutions, even if
both, by virtue of technological advances administered for the wel-
fare of all men, were able to achieve the same high standard of liv-
ing for all. A high standard of living is at its best a plentiful subsis-
tence, consisting of the comforts and conveniences of life. It does
not by itself ensure freedom or the good life. It is compatible with
slavery to a totalitarian State, and with subservience to the wrong
ends.
There is all the difference in the world between a good living
and living well. The goal of the capitalist revolution, as Mr. Kelso
sees it, is not economic welfare as an end in itself, but rather the
good human life for all. In achieving this end, the capitalist revolu-
tion will not sacrifice freedom for welfare. It will secure liberty as
well as equality for all men. It will subordinate economic to politi-
cal activity—the management of things to the government of men.
12
Mr. Kelso gave me the opportunity to read the manuscript of a
book about capitalism which he first drafted some ten years ago. In
the last two years, I have had many conversations with him while
he has been in the process of rewriting that book, which is now
completed. In the course of these conversations, we have both
come to see the broad philosophical and historical significance of
the fundamental tenets of a sound theory of capitalism. It was with
these discoveries in mind that I persuaded Louis Kelso to engage
with me in the writing of THE CAPITALIST MANIFESTO.
The first part of this Manifesto explains the philosophical and historical
ideas that are involved in a sound understanding of the principles of
capitalism and of the revolution to which those principles lead.
The second part sets forth a practical program which we be-
lieve is a feasible way of accomplishing the capitalist revolution in
the United States within the next fifty years. By making our society
a pilot model of democratic capitalism we can also make the
United States the world’s leader in the march toward freedom and
justice for men everywhere.
Mortimer J. Adler
San Francisco, February, 1958
13
PART ONE
T H E I D E A
O F T H E
C A P I T A L I S T
R E V O L U T I O N
14
1 WHY A CAPITALIST MANIFESTO?
THEN AND NOW
In 1848, a world-shaking document, now known as the Communist
Manifesto, sounded the call to overthrow primitive capitalism––a
term we will define later. Actually, the title was Manifesto of the Com-
munist Party. This fact is significant for the comparison we wish to
draw between that manifesto and this one, which we hope will re-
place it as a call to action.
Ours is not the manifesto of a revolutionary party dedicated to
overthrowing the established order. It is instead a revolutionary
manifesto which calls upon the American people as a whole to find
in the established order the reasons for its renovation and the
seeds of the better society we can develop. The end, at last in view,
is that ideal society to which America has always been dedicated
and toward which it has made great progress since its beginning.
THE CAPITALIST MANIFESTO is intended to replace the Com-
munist Manifesto as a call to action, first of all in our own country,
and then, with our country’s leadership, everywhere else in the
world. It is our industrial power and capital wealth, together with
our institutions of political liberty and justice, that make America
the place where the capitalist revolution must first take place to es-
tablish economic liberty and justice for all.
15
But while we intend this Manifesto for capitalism, to replace the
earlier one against it, and while we have every reason to hope that
the principles and program of this Manifesto can win the minds of
thinking men, we cannot deceive ourselves that it will ever have the
blind emotional appeal that made the earlier Manifesto so powerful
a revolutionary force.
Perhaps a word should be said about our use of the words
“capitalism” and “capitalist.” These words have different connota-
tions for different people, as do “communism” and “communist.”
The unfortunate connotations of “capitalism” come from the
widely prevalent habit of applying it to the kind of industrial econ-
omy which flourished in England and the United States in the mid-
dle of the nineteenth century, and which persisted with only minor
modifications until the first decades of the twentieth. Almost eve-
ryone agrees today that the economy needed to be reformed; and
in consequence, many who approve of some or all of the economic
reforms that have occurred in America in the last thirty years are
apt to be sensitive to certain overtones that the word “capitalism”
has in general usage.
Nevertheless, we feel that “capitalism” is the right word to use
as the name for the ideally just organization of an industrial econ-
omy. In later chapters we shall identify and name forms of capital-
ism which are far from being embodiments of economic justice,
among them not only nineteenth-century capitalism but also the
kind of capitalism that exists at present in England and the United
States, on the one hand, and the kind that exists in Soviet Russia,
on the other.
It would be a mistake to relinquish the word “democracy” be-
cause that word was used in the past for a form of government
that was far from being just, as in the case of the slave societies of
antiquity in which only a small portion of the population was ad-
mitted to citizenship and granted the political rights to which all
men are entitled as a matter of justice. We think it would be a mis-
16
take of the same sort to relinquish the word “capitalism.” As we
employ the name “democracy” for the just polity that has only re-
cently begun to exist, so we should employ the name “capitalism”
for the just economy that can be brought into existence. To bring
that about is the objective of the capitalist revolution.
THE PREVAILING SENSE OF WELL-BEING
We are initially addressing ourselves to Americans––to men who
feel well-off––and not to the starving, downtrodden victims of in-
justice and oppression. We cannot exhort them to engage in vio-
lence, and to do so without fear because they have nothing to lose
but their chains. We must persuade them, in much calmer tones
than that, to act rationally, with insight and prudence, because they
do have something to lose––their freedom––which an abundance
of creature comforts may have lulled them into forgetting.
Men who think they already have all the liberty and justice they
can expect, in addition to plenty of material goods, cannot be emo-
tionally exhorted to take radical measures for the improvement of
their society. They can only be asked to think again.
We might properly begin THE CAPITALIST MANIFESTO with
the statement that the specter of communism is still haunting Eu-
rope and the world. Such a declaration should strike terror in the
hearts of Americans. But most Americans have been rendered im-
pervious to it by the pervasive feeling that it cannot happen here.
Most of us do not realize that something approaching it has already
happened here, and that if we continue along the paths we have
taken in the last thirty years, we can go even further in the wrong
direction. Again, it is our general sense of well-being that prevents
us from realizing what has happened to us and what threatens to
happen.
17
When the Communist Manifesto first announced that the specter
of communism was haunting Europe, that society as a whole was
split into two great hostile camps––the owners of capital and the
employers of labor, on the one hand; and the propertyless workers,
or proletariat, on the other. Marx and Engels admired the power of
capital. “The bourgeoisie,” they asserted, “during its rule of scarce
one hundred years, has created more massive and more colossal
productive forces than have all preceding generations together.”
But they deplored the consequences of the power wielded by the
owners of capital.
Capital property was owned by less than one-tenth of the pop-
ulation, under whose tyrannical will the remaining nine-tenths lived
like slaves. Hence the authors of the Communist Manifesto called for
the transfer of all private property in capital instruments to the
State, where it would be administered––they claimed––for the
benefit of all men.
Let us now consider the situation in America today and the
condition of those to whom THE CAPITALIST MANIFESTO is ad-
dressed. This manifesto is written in an atmosphere that is not
merely free from the starvation and degradation of the masses, but
in which almost the whole of society is enjoying the highest stan-
dard of material well-being ever known to a nation or to any sig-
nificant number of individuals. Not only do we have high wages
and full employment, but so great an opportunity for employment
that a proportion of wives and mothers higher than ever before
can find jobs in commerce and industry, in many cases to raise
even higher an already high family standard of living. Largely
through the efforts of labor unions, heavily fortified by legislation
born during the Great Depression of the nineteen-thirties, the gen-
eral hours of employment have been reduced again and again, until
today few people regularly work more than forty hours a week.
Some industries are already stabilized at thirty-six hours a week,
and the leaders of the great union, the AFL-CIO, are already talk-
18
ing seriously about the thirty-hour week, the regular month-long
vacation, the periodic three-month vacation, and more holidays.
The general talk about “American Capitalism,” “Modern Capi-
talism,” or “People’s Capitalism” pictures something that looks like
the very opposite of nineteenth-century capitalism as described by
Marx and Engels. On all sides we hear that this current brand of
capitalism is something entirely new in the last three decades, and
that it fulfills the promise of a high standard of living for all, a high
degree of freedom from toil for all, and the most generous measure
of personal freedom for all. The secret formula of this happy state
of affairs we attribute in large measure to the intellect of John May-
nard Keynes. The principal parts of the formula can be stated as
follows:
1. Mass consumption is necessary if all members of a society are
to have a high standard of living. What is more significant,
mass consumption is necessary to support mass production in
an industrial economy.
2. But mass consumption cannot exist or continue unless there is
a mass distribution of purchasing power.
3. The proper method of creating a mass distribution of pur-
chasing power is mass employment: i.e., “full employment” or
the employment of every person who would like to be em-
ployed.
4. Since prosperity and well-being depend upon the successful dis-
tribution of purchasing power, this can be achieved through
progressively raising, by union pressure and legislation, wages,
social security payments, unemployment compensation, agri-
cultural and other prices; and through the free use of income
taxing power and other powers of government to promote full
employment.
By the Employment Act of 1946, we have adopted a national
policy of maximum employment.
19
At last we seem almost on the verge of feeling that we can
cope with that nightmare of an industrial economy––the depression.
In short, capitalism, once denounced as exploiting and op-
pressing the worker, seems to have evolved into a system which
provides the benefits once claimed for socialism, but without––it is
believed––the loss of freedom that inheres in socialism.
The good life for the worker seems to have been discovered in
America. Justice seems to have reformed and made decent the
once pitiless primitive capitalistic economy.
OUR MACHINE-PRODUCED HAPPINESS
The cause of this felicitous state of affairs, we are told, is the ever
increasing use of ever more efficient capital instruments. These
tend constantly and endlessly to raise the “productivity of labor,”
and thus account for an ever increasing output of goods and ser-
vices per worker employed. The principal guide to management
and labor in negotiating these perpetually increasing wages is that
“wage increases and benefits should be consistent with productiv-
ity prospects and with the maintenance of a stable dollar.”1
Labor leaders are in full agreement with this principle. They
openly and frankly support technological advances which in turn
raise the “productivity of labor,” which in turn calls for increases in
wages to provide the mass purchasing power to support the mass
production, etc.2
1 Economic Report of the President, 1957, p. 3.
2 See Philip Murray, Annual Report, 14th Constitutional Convention, C.I.O., 1952
(reprinted in Supplement to The People Shall Judge, Chicago, 1956). See also hear-
ings before the Subcommittee on Economic Stabilization of the Joint Economic
Committee on Automation and Technological Change, 1955: pp. 120, 220, 234, 287,
337, 419, 455, 463.
20
The net result of all this, and of the general progress of scien-
tific development in and for industry, is that the rate of technologi-
cal advance is accelerating. Instead of finding ourselves confronted
with a point of diminishing returns, we find that this happy state of
affairs promises to get happier as we make more and more techno-
logical progress, to which there is no end in sight.
No specter can threaten us while we are under the care of our
guardian angel––our modern capitalistic economy!
OUR FEELING ABOUT SOCIALISM
In addition to the general sense of well-being that we all share and
attribute to our form of capitalism, we are united in our feeling
about socialism. As a people, we dislike it and rule it out as an ac-
ceptable alternative to capitalism.
It is all but universally agreed in the United States that social-
ism is the antitheses of the American way, that it infringes on hu-
man freedom, and that it should be avoided at all costs.
It is recognized––sometimes articulately, sometimes only intui-
tively––that the combination of economic power and political
power in the hands of government officials is the very opposite of
the American principle of the separation of powers and of our sys-
tem of checks and balances. It is widely felt that such fusion of po-
litical and economic power, which inevitably results when the same
bureaucracy not only runs the political machinery of the state but
also wields the economic power that is inherent in the state’s own-
ership of industry, leads to the destruction of individual liberties. It
is generally thought that individual freedom and private property
are inseparably connected.
Our sense of the undesirability of socialism and our rejection
of it as the antithesis of the American way of life adds to our satis-
21
faction with the new capitalistic economy we have developed. By
creating purchasing power to provide full employment, a satisfac-
tory standard of living for all households, and high incomes for city
dwellers as well as for farmers, we seem to have accomplished all
that could be desired and, once and for all, to have discredited so-
cialism as a remedy for the ills and instability of the modern indus-
trial economy.
THE AMBUSH
With this economic paradise at hand, why would anyone have the
audacity, the ingratitude, or the effrontery to call for the renovation
of our society by a capitalist revolution?
A memorial to the new capitalism? Yes. A guidebook to ex-
plain its inner secrets to the uninitiated? Yes. But why a revolution-
ary manifesto?
Our answer is: To point out that while no specter is haunting
America, socialism in a variety of ways is coming in by the back
door; to explain that capitalism––”pure capitalism” or capitalism
unmixed with socialism––is the only economic system compatible
with political democracy; and to show not only that we are a long
way from having such an economic system, but also that we have
not yet become clear about the principles of such a system.
The picture of accomplished politico-economic perfection is an
illusion. What has been acclaimed as American Capitalism, Modern
Capitalism, or People’s Capitalism is a mixture of capitalism and so-
cialism. If the process of socialization is carried forward with the
tremendous technological advances now impending, we will be
brought closer and closer to complete socialism, i.e., State capital-
ism. Nothing can stop this process except the capitalist revolution.
22
What appears to be the increasing productiveness of labor is
not the increasing productiveness of labor but the increasing pro-
ductiveness of capital.
What appears to be the preservation of private property in the
means of production, particularly in the capital wealth of corpora-
tions, is characterized by only a fraction of the rights that would
justify its being called private property.
What appears to be justice in the distribution of incomes is in
fact gross injustice.
What promises to free men from unnecessary toil is of such a
nature that it must unavoidably saddle them with unnecessary toil.
What seems at first glance to be an economic order consistent
with the American system of separated and balanced powers, as
the most dependable safeguard of human freedom, is in fact creat-
ing a centralization of power that would have brought our ances-
tors to arms.
Though it is fashionable today to believe that we are advancing
toward a sound capitalism, an understanding of the principles of
capitalism will disclose that we are retreating from it and, instead,
advancing toward a socialist state.
Never before has a society marched more joyously into am-
bush by the very forces it implacably opposes but does not recog-
nize. We are faced with the spectacle of a nation sincerely seeking
democracy and economic justice through means which it fails to
recognize as destructive of both.
That is why we think a capitalist manifesto is in order. It is to
clear up this case of mistaken identity that we wish to re-examine
the nature of economic freedom, private property, justice in distri-
bution, industrial production, and economic democracy. And, to
supplement this, we will propose a series of wholly feasible
changes, which we believe should be brought about to set our soci-
23
ety on the course toward the fully developed capitalism that is the
counterpart of political democracy.
AN APPEAL TO REASON
We have called this brief statement of theory and this outline of
practical proposals a Manifesto because we think the occasion calls
for a public declaration of the principles of “pure capitalism” and
of a program which is calculated to achieve it.
The principles of capitalism have heretofore been seen only
fragmentarily and in a confused manner. In their simplicity, they
are applicable only to a mature industrial economy. Only in an
economy which produces the preponderant portion of its goods
and services by capital instruments, and which is well enough
equipped with such capital instruments to produce and enjoy a
high standard of living, can the truth as well as the feasibility of
capitalistic economy be readily seen.
To grasp the truth of these principles, and to understand their
consequences, requires careful, sustained, rational thought. The
only appeal this Manifesto makes is an appeal for such thought
about the problems we face.
24
2 ECONOMIC FREEDOM :
PROPERTY AND LEISURE
THE THREE ELEMENTS OF ECONOMIC FREEDOM
In all the slave societies of the past, human beings were divided
into two classes. On the one hand, there were the owners of prop-
erty––in land, animals, slaves, raw material and tools. They were
the masters and as such they were economically free men. On the
other hand, there were the toilers who had no property of the
aforementioned sort. They were the slaves, men without any eco-
nomic freedom.
Aristotle distinguished between two types of slavery: (1) the
chattel slavery of those who were the property of other men and so
were totally deprived of property, even of property in their own
labor power; and (2) what he called the “special and separate slav-
ery”1 of the meaner sort of artisan or mechanic who had no prop-
erty beyond his own labor power and so was forced to lead a ser-
vile life.
1 Politics, Book I, Ch. 13, 1260b1-2.
25
What is true of the chattel slaves and servile artisans of ancient
Greece and Rome is essentially true of the serfs in the agrarian
economies of feudal Europe, and of the wage slaves who formed
the industrial proletariat in the middle of the nineteenth century. At
no time in the past were the working masses economically free
men. Nor, until the power of organized labor gave them some
measure of the economic independence which property in capital
always bestowed on the leisure class, were they admitted to suf-
frage and the political freedom of a voice in their own government.
Before the rise of industrial production and organized labor,
the members of the ruling class were for the most part identical
with the members of the leisure class. This is true of colonial
America and of the first decades of our republic as well as of the
republics of ancient Greece and Rome. The men of property were
economically free men. Because they had through property a free-
dom which they wished to protect, they strove to safeguard it with
the rights and privileges of political status and power. Their eco-
nomic freedom was the basis of their claim to political liberty.
But their economic freedom was also the basis of their oppor-
tunity to lead a human as opposed to a subhuman life. In all the
pre-industrial societies of the past, this opportunity was open only
to those who could engage in the liberal activities of leisure be-
cause they obtained all they needed for subsistence and comfort
from income-bearing property other than their own labor power.
To understand this, let us contrast the condition of the slave
with that of the economically free man. We shall see that there are
three elements in economic freedom, the most significant of
which is freedom from toil or freedom for leisure. This is indis-
pensable to leading a free, as opposed to a servile, life. The slave
not only lacked such freedom, but also the economic independ-
ence and security without which political liberty cannot be effec-
tively employed or enjoyed.
In the following threefold contrast between the conditions of
economic slavery and freedom, the word “slave” is used in the
26
broadest sense to cover not only men who belong to other men as
their private chattels, but also all who are forced by lack of prop-
erty to lead servile or subhuman lives.
1. The slave was a man who worked for the good or profit of an-
other man, and worked as an instrument or tool of that other
man as well as in his interests. He was exploited in the sense
that the fruits of his labor were alienated from his good to that
of another. In contrast, the economically free man engaged in
no activity in which he served as the instrument of another
man, and did nothing which served any good except his own or
the common good of his society.
2. The slave was a man who was dependent for his subsistence on
the arbitrary will of another man, his master. In this condition,
he was always threatened with economic destitution––
starvation or worse. He had no economic security or freedom
from want. In contrast, the master as an owner of property was
an economically independent man. This is not to say that any
man is ever wholly secure from misfortune. Since wealth is
among the goods of fortune, it is always subject to accidents.
But allowing for accidents, the economically free man is one
who has enough property to be free from want without greater
dependence on other men than they have upon him, and to be
relatively secure against the threat of destitution.
3. The slave was a man who spent most of his time and energy in
toil. Toil for him began in childhood and ended with his death,
usually an early one; and it occupied almost all of his waking life,
seven days a week. What time was left he needed for sleep and
other basic biological functions in order to keep alive. In contrast,
the man who obtained all the subsistence he needed, or much
more than that, from the use of his property, including the labor of
his slaves, had economic freedom in the most important sense of
this term: freedom from toil. Only when such freedom is added to
freedom from want, insecurity, or destitution––and to freedom
from exploitation by another and from dependence on the arbi-
27
trary will of another––do we approach the ideal of liberty in the
economic sphere of human life.
These three contrasts between the condition of masters and the
condition of slaves, as men who are and are not economically free,
can be summarized by the antithesis Aristotle draws between the
servile and the free life. Some men, according to Aristotle, merely
subsist; others are able, beyond subsistence, to live well, i.e., to en-
gage in leisure activities.2 The servile life consists in nothing but toil
in order to subsist. Men who have the misfortune of being chattels
or of being propertyless are forced to lead a servile life––a life of
toil, insecurity, and dependence.
Of course, some men who are fortunate enough to have suffi-
cient property to live well actually degrade themselves to the level
of the servile life by using all their time and energy in accumulating
wealth and even by engaging in toil to do so. While men without
property cannot live well, not all men with property do live well,
but only those who, understanding the difference between labor
and leisure, direct their activities to the goals of the free life.3
2 Aristotle describes the occupation of virtuous men of property in the following
manner: “Those who are in a position which places them above toil have stew-
ards who attend to their households while they occupy themselves with philoso-
phy and politics” (Politics, Book 1, Ch. 7, 1225b35-38). In this passage, the
words “philosophy” and “politics” are shorthand for all the activities of leisure–
engagement in the liberal arts and sciences and occupation with the institutions
and processes of society.
3 Distinguishing between two kinds of wealth getting, Aristotle says that “accu-
mulation is the end in the one case, but there is a further end in the other. Hence
some persons are led to believe that getting wealth is the object of household
management, and the whole idea of their lives is that they ought either to in-
crease their money, or at any rate not to lose it. The origin of this disposition in
men,” he declares, “is that they are intent upon living only, and not upon living
well” (Politics, Book 1, Ch. 9, 1257b35-1258a2).
28
LABOR, LEISURE AND FREEDOM
The distinction between labor and leisure is generally misunder-
stood in twentieth-century America. Leisure is misconceived as
idleness, vacationing (which involves “vacancy”), play, recreation,
relaxation, diversion, amusement and so on. If leisure were that, it
would never have been regarded by anyone except a child or a
childish adult as something morally better than socially useful
work.
The misconception of leisure arises from the fact that it in-
volves free time––time that is free from the biological necessity of
sleep, and of labor to obtain the means of subsistence. Such time
can, of course, be filled in various ways: with amusements and di-
versions of all sorts, or with the intrinsically virtuous activities by
which men pursue happiness and serve the common good of their
society. Leisure, properly conceived as the main content of a free,
as opposed to a servile, life, consists in activities which are neither
toil nor play, but are rather the expressions of moral and intellec-
tual virtue––the things a good man does because they are intrinsi-
cally good for him and for his society, making him better as a man
and advancing the civilization in which he lives.
In all the pre-industrial societies of the past, when only a few
were exempt from grinding toil, the activities of leisure were as
sharply distinguished from indulgence in amusements or recrea-
tions as they were from the drudgery of toil. Husbandmen, crafts-
men, and laborers of all sorts provided society with its means of
subsistence and its material comforts. They had little or no time
free for leisure or for play. Ample free time belonged only to those
who obtained their subsistence from the property they owned and
the labor of others. If these men had frittered away their free time
in frivolity and play, the civilization to which we are the heirs
would never have been produced; for civilization, as opposed to
subsistence, is produced by those who have free time and use it
creatively––to develop the liberal arts and sciences and all the insti-
tutions of the state and of religion.
29
Play, like sleep, washes away the fatigues and tensions that re-
sult from the serious occupations of life, all the forms of labor
which produce the goods of subsistence and all the leisure activities
which produce the goods of civilization. Play and sleep, as Aristotle
pointed out, are for the sake of these serious and socially useful
occupations. Since the activities of leisure can be as exacting and
tiring as the activities of toil, some form of relaxation, whether
sleep or play or both, is required by those who work productively.4
As play is for the sake of work, so subsistence work is for the
sake of leisure activity. To confuse leisure either with idleness or
amusement is to invert the order of goods which gave moral sig-
nificance to the class divisions in all the pre-industrial societies of
the past. Those among our ancestors who were men of virtue as
well as men of property would find it difficult to understand how
any self-respecting man could regard indulgence in amusements as
the goal of life. They looked upon the labor of slaves and artisans
as the means which provided them with the opportunity to engage
in leisure, not in play. To expect the masses to labor from dawn to
dusk and throughout life so that a small class of men could waste
their free time in idleness, amusement, or sport would express, in
their view, a degree of childishness or immorality that could be
found only in the most depraved or vicious members of their
class.5
4 See Aristotle’s Politics, Book VII, Chs. 9, 14 and 15; Book VIII, Ch. 3.
5 When, in 1825, the journeymen carpenters of Boston struck for higher wages
and shorter hours, the master carpenters, their employers, replied that “the
measures proposed [were] calculated to exert a very unhappy influence on our
apprentices––by seducing them from that course of industry and economy of
time to which we are anxious to inure them.” They also maintained “that it will
expose the journeymen themselves to many temptations and improvident prac-
tices from which they are happily secure,” adding “that we consider idleness as
the most deadly bane to useful and honorable living.” They were supported in
this by the “gentlemen engaged in building,” who did not regard their own free
time as an occasion for vice. Two years later when a strike of journeyman car-
penters in Philadelphia led to a city-wide federation of labor unions, the Pream-
ble of the Mechanics’ Union of Trade Associations declared that they were
30
Since the confusion of leisure with idleness or amusement is
rampant in our industrial society, when, for the first time in history,
it has become possible for all men to have enough free time to en-
gage in leisure, it may be difficult for our contemporaries to under-
stand that labor and leisure are the two main forms of human work,
and that the first is for the sake of the second. Unless they do un-
derstand this, however, they will not see the ultimate moral signifi-
cance of the capitalist revolution. It may increase human freedom
and strengthen the institutions of a free society, but freedom itself
is only a means. Freedom can be squandered and perverted as well
as put to good use.
Only if freedom from labor becomes freedom for leisure will
the capitalist revolution produce a better civilization than any so far
achieved, and one in the production of which all men will partici-
pate. Only if men thus use their opportunity for leisure will the
capitalist revolution result in an improvement of human life itself,
and not merely in its external conditions or institutions. As labor is
for the sake of leisure, so freedom and justice for all are the institu-
tional means whereby the good life that was enjoyed by the few
alone in the pre-industrial aristocracies of the past will be open to
all men in the capitalistic democracies of the future.6
placed “in a situation of such unceasing exertion and servility as must necessar-
ily, in time, render the benefits of our liberal institutions to us inaccessible and
useless.” They looked to the progressive shortening of the working day as the
means whereby all the useful members of the community would gradually come
to possess “a due and full proportion of that invaluable promoter of happiness,
leisure” (reprinted in The People Shall Judge, Chicago, 1953: Vol. 1, pp. 580-583).
6 Sleep, play, toil, and leisure represent diverse goods in human life. But they do
not have the same moral value. As contrasted with idleness, indolence, or the
wanton waste of human time and energy, sleep and play contribute to human
well-being. But they contribute less than productive toil and leisure. All the
goods that contribute positively to human well-being must be sought in the pur-
suit of happiness, but they must be sought in the right order and proportion. A
man defeats himself in the pursuit of happiness if he places the goods of the
body above the goods of the soul, or if he plays so much in his free time that he
has little time left for leisure.
31
The current misuse of the word “leisure” requires us to find
other words for expressing the basic distinction which is so essen-
tial to the understanding of the capitalist revolution. We may not
always be able to avoid using that word, but at least we can try to
correct misunderstanding by the employment of other words or
phrases for expressing its meaning.
It may be helpful to observe that where Aristotle drew a sharp
line between labor and leisure, Adam Smith made the same distinc-
tion in human activities by drawing an equally sharp line between
what he called “productive labor” and “non-productive labor.” His
use of the word “labor” shows that he had socially useful work in
mind in both cases, and not idleness or play. By “non-productive
labor,” he meant the activities of the clergy, statesmen, philoso-
phers, scientists, artists, teachers, physicians and lawyers. He called
these activities “labor” because, like the forms of work that are
productive of wealth, they are not playful but serious, and serve a
socially useful purpose. And he called such labor “non-productive”
because, unlike other forms of work, the socially useful purpose
they serve is not the production of wealth or the goods of bodily
subsistence, but the production of civilization, or the goods of the
human spirit.
We think it is better to use the term “work” for both forms of
activity. We shall speak of “subsistence work” when we mean the
activities that are productive of wealth (i.e., the necessities, com-
forts and conveniences of life); and we shall speak of “liberal
work” or “leisure work” when we mean the activities that are pro-
ductive of the goods of civilization (i.e., the liberal arts and sci-
ences, the institutions of the state and of religion).
Whenever we revert to the use of the words “labor” and “lei-
sure” without qualification, we hope it will be understood that la-
bor is identical with subsistence work and leisure with liberal
work. The fact that leisure is equated with one of the two principal
forms of human work should help to prevent anyone from con-
fusing it with play or idleness. The fact that the goods which it
produces are so different from the goods produced by subsistence
32
work should also help to preserve the distinction between labor
and leisure, which is so necessary for all that follows.
THE FORM AND CHARACTER OF HUMAN WORK
So far we have distinguished two main forms of human work
solely by reference to what they produce, or the ends they serve:
on the one hand, the goods of the body, the biological goods of
subsistence, the necessities, comforts and conveniences of life; on
the other hand, the goods of the soul, the goods of civilization or
of the human spirit, such things as the arts and sciences, the insti-
tutions of the state and of religion.
Work can be differentiated by reference to its human quality as
well as by reference to its end or purpose.
Certain forms of work are mechanical in quality. They involve
repetitive, routine operations which call for little or no creative in-
telligence upon the part of the worker. They also involve bodily
exertion, or at least some manual dexterity; but it is the mechanical
character of the task to be performed, not the physical character of
the performance, which makes such work stultifying.
The materials on which the worker operates, but not his own
nature, are improved by his efforts. After he has acquired the
minimum skill required for doing it, he learns nothing more. He
may increase the store of useful goods in the world, but he does
not himself grow in stature as a man.
The Greek word banausia expressed the degrading quality of
the mechanical work done by slaves––the dullness of the repeti-
tive which is most intense in the kind of toil we call “drudgery.”
Because of its repetitiveness, the person who is engaged in it does
not grow mentally, morally, or spiritually. On the contrary, drudg-
ery stunts growth.
Because it is intrinsically unrewarding, such work must be ex-
trinsically compensated. It is done under compulsion––the need
for subsistence. Anyone who could secure his subsistence from
33
other sources would try to avoid it, or do as little of it as possible.
Hence such work is normally done for extrinsic compensation of
some sort, whether in the shape of immediately consumable goods,
or wages, or the meager subsistence meted out to a slave.
At the opposite extreme from work that is mechanical in qual-
ity as well as done to produce and obtain subsistence, there is work
that is creative in quality as well as liberal in the end at which it
aims. All leisure activities constitute work of this sort. The creative
aspect of such work is signified by the Greek word for leisure,
which was scholé. Like our English word “school,” it connotes
learning––mental, moral, or spiritual growth.
Such work is, therefore, intrinsically rewarding. It is something
which every man should, and any virtuous man would, do for its own
sake. If he has sufficient property to secure for himself and his
family a sufficiency of the means of subsistence, the virtuous man
gladly engages in liberal work without extrinsic compensation. Like
virtue itself, such work is its own reward.
We have just seen that the forms of human work can be differ-
entiated by reference to their human quality, or the effect they have
on the worker, as well as differentiated by reference to the goods
they produce for society as a whole. We must now observe that
these distinctions can be compounded.
At one extreme in the scale of human work, certain socially
useful activities combine having the production of wealth as their
aim with being mechanical in quality. At the opposite extreme are
the highest activities of leisure, which combine being creative in
quality with having as their aim the production of the goods of
civilization and of the human spirit. In between these extremes,
there are the mixed forms of work: on the one hand, subsistence
work which, while it aims at the production of wealth, is creative
rather than mechanical in quality; on the other hand, work which,
while mechanical in quality, nevertheless serves a purpose which is
identical with the aim of liberal work.
This fourfold division of the kinds of work is of critical signifi-
cance when we come subsequently to consider the variety of tasks
34
to be performed in our modern industrial society. For the present,
we shall use it in order to call attention to a widely prevalent mis-
understanding about the dignity of human work.
In the ancient world––in fact, in all the pre-industrial societies
of the past––no one made the mistake of supposing that equal dig-
nity attaches to all human activity. Human dignity was thought to
reside primarily in those activities which are specifically or charac-
teristically human, i.e., activities which have no counterpart what-
soever in the life of brute animals or in the operations of machines.
Brutes as well as men struggle for subsistence. Though the
subsistence activities of brutes are largely instinctive, while those of
men usually involve some employment of intelligence or reason,
the goal or end of such activities is the same in both cases. Human
life has its distinctive worth or dignity only insofar as it rises above
biological activities and involves activities which are not performed
by brutes, or at least not performed in the same way.
Man’s special dignity lies in goods which no other animal
shares with him at all, as other animals share with him the goods of
food, shelter, and even those of sleep and play. Hence man has no
special dignity as a producer of subsistence or wealth, but only as a
user of wealth for the sake of specifically liberal activities produc-
tive of the goods of the spirit and of civilization.
It follows, therefore, that the only dignity there is in working to
produce subsistence comes from such creative use of intelligence
or reason as may be involved in the performance of tasks that are
nonmechanical in quality. Even so, they have less dignity than
nonmechanical or creative work which is liberal in its aim. Work
which is not only mechanical in quality but also has the production
of subsistence as its only aim is lowest in the scale. Such dignity as
attaches to any work productive of subsistence, whether mechani-
cal or creative, derives from the fact that the production of wealth,
rightly understood, serves to support the leisure activities that con-
stitute the dignity of human life.
It may be thought that St. Paul preaches a Christian message to
the contrary when he says of those who do not work, neither shall
35
they eat. But it should be remembered, in the first place, that the
toil by which man eats in the sweat of his face is a punishment for
sin, not an honor or a blessing. And, in the second place, it should
be observed that the word St. Paul uses, in making this remark,
means any form of socially useful activity, and not labor in the nar-
row sense of toil for the sake of subsistence .7 What he is saying, in
short, is that all men are under a moral obligation not just to work
for a living, but to work in order to deserve a living. In the Chris-
tian sense, those who, having the means of subsistence, do not try
to live well by doing liberal work enjoy a living they do not deserve.
THE IMAGE OF AN ECONOMICALLY FREE SOCIETY
So far we have seen how the life of a master in a slave society con-
tains all the elements of economic freedom, and therewith the op-
portunities for leading a good life, which he will use well only if he
is a man of virtue.
The possession of sufficient productive capital property en-
ables a man to be economically free, but by itself it cannot make
him lead a free and liberal life rather than a life devoted to the pro-
duction or consumption of subsistence. He may engage in toil or
trade even if he does not have to, because he does not have the
virtue to rise above it; or, worse than that, he may squander his
time and energies in indolence, or in pastimes which, no matter
how innocuous, corrupt him precisely because he has elevated
them to the level of ends. It should be added that pastimes seldom
remain innocuous when they have to fill most of a man’s waking
time.
In the pre-industrial aristocracies of the past, only the fortunate
few possessed all the elements of economic freedom; and of these,
fewer still––those who were virtuous as well as fortunate––
employed that freedom to do the work of leisure to the benefit of
themselves and their society. These advantages were bought at the
7 See Jacques Maritain, Freedom in the Modern World, New York, 1936: p. 59.
36
terrible price of slavery and misery for the masses who toiled not
merely for their own meager subsistence, but to provide the wealth
that supported the pursuit of happiness and the development of
civilization by those who had economic freedom and used it well.
Freedom built upon slavery, the leisure of a privileged class
supported by the unremitting toil of the masses, the opportunity
for the few to lead a decent human life as the flower of a civiliza-
tion whose roots lay in the submerged and subhuman lives of the
toiling masses––this was the accepted order in all the class-divided
societies of the pre-industrial past.
We now know what our ancestors did not know: that, under
conditions of industrial production, and with the promise of capi-
talism fulfilled, it is possible for a whole society to be economically
free and for all men to have the opportunity to live like human be-
ings.
From the Egyptians, the Chaldeans, the Jews, and the Greeks
down to the middle of the nineteenth century, or even to the end
of it, it was generally supposed that slavery, or the equivalent of it
in grinding toil and drudgery, was the necessary price that mankind
had to pay for the advancement of civilization itself, as contrasted
with the static and rudimentary culture of primitive life. If all men
had to work for a living, that is, if every one had to spend most of
his time in subsistence work in order to support himself and his
family, no one would be left free for leisure or nonsubsistence
work––the liberal work of civilization itself.
Prior to the industrial revolution, it was almost impossible to
conceive a practicable division of labor which, while securing
enough wealth to provide the means of liberal work as well as sub-
sistence for a whole society, would also permit all members of the
society to engage in liberal activities as well as in subsistence work.
The only practical solution seemed to be slavery or slave labor in
one form or another. The enslavement of the many, in lives occu-
pied almost entirely with toil, emancipated the few for the pursuits
of civilization. Prior to this century, the achievements of Western
civilization––all its fine arts, pure sciences, all its political and reli-
37
gious institutions––were the product of the liberal work done by
the virtuous members of its leisure class, just as obviously as all its
economic crafts and goods were the product of the subsistence
work done by its toiling masses.
We said a moment ago that no one prior to our own time
could conceive of any practical solution other than one which in-
volved slavery, or at least a life for the masses devoted to the me-
chanical work of producing subsistence, upon which all men might
live and some might, in addition, live well. This amounts to saying
that no one could conceive an economically free society, i.e., an eco-
nomically classless society in which all men, not just a few, would
be economically free and would live like human beings if they were
virtuous enough to use their economic freedom well. The state-
ment is literally true if by “conceive” we mean thinking out in de-
tail a practicable plan for the economic organization of a society
that would make all its members economically free.
But one man, more than 2,300 years ago, was able to imagine,
even if he could not practically conceive, an economically free so-
ciety. His was the kind of fantasy that it takes a genius to dream.
Though it was only a dream for him, the image he conjured up is
no dream for us. It is the quite practicable ideal of a classless soci-
ety of economically free men, with slavery or its equivalents abol-
ished, and with the mechanical work of producing subsistence re-
duced to a minimum for all.
Though Aristotle did not and could not dream up the capitalist
revolution in concrete practical terms, he did, in a single sentence,
imagine a possibility that capitalism, and capitalism alone, can real-
ize. He said:
If every instrument could accomplish its own work, obeying or
anticipating the will of others . . . if the shuttle could weave and the
plectrum touch the lyre without a hand to guide them, chief work-
men would not want servants, nor masters slaves.8
8 Politics, Book 1, Ch. 4, 1253b34-1254a1. This passage occurs in the context of a
statement to the effect that “instruments are of various sorts; some are living,
38
Since we are dealing with a dream, let us indulge ourselves in
one more moment of dreaming. In that single sentence, Aristotle
projected in his imagination a society which has gone beyond the
industrial revolution to a state of complete automation: a thorough
substitution of automatic machines for slaves, i.e., for human be-
ings doing subsistence work of a purely mechanical sort.
It is important to realize that machines can be substituted for
men only where men perform tasks that are mechanical in quality;
i.e., repetitive tasks performed by rote or rule, and without any in-
volvement at all of creative thought. What men do mechanically,
machines can do as well, and usually much better. The task (for
example, extended calculation) may be mechanical, even though
the end for which it is performed is liberal.
With this clearly in mind, we can see that the dream of complete
automation envisages all work that is mechanical in quality
(whether or not its end is subsistence) being done by automatic
machines, including the production of the machines themselves.
The invention or improvement of these machines and the man-
agement of the productive processes in which they are engaged is
work that aims at the production of subsistence, but it is liberal in
character. Though its end is subsistence, it is creative; being non-
mechanical, it cannot be done by machines. In our dream of com-
plete automation, we must, therefore, be careful to exclude the
technical work involved in the invention or improvement of ma-
chines, and the managerial work involved in the organization and
administration of the productive process as a whole.
Even with these two significant exclusions in the sphere of
subsistence work, we know that complete automation is impossible,
but we also know that within the next hundred years progressively
others lifeless; in the rudder, the pilot of a ship has a lifeless, in the look-out
man, a living instrument; for in the arts the servant is a kind of instrument . . .
[An economic] possession is an instrument for maintaining life. And so, in the
arrangement of the family, a slave is a living possession, and property a number
of such instruments; and the servant is himself an instrument which takes prece-
dence over all other instruments” (ibid., 1253b27-33).
39
increasing automation will achieve a remarkable approximation of
the dream. Hence, by analyzing the dream as if it were real, we can
learn something about an ideal that it will be practicable for us to
realize approximately.
Let us, then, for one more moment of projection, imagine a
society in which machines do all or most of the mechanical work
that must be done to provide the wealth necessary both for subsis-
tence and for civilization. Let us imagine, further, that in this soci-
ety, every man, or every family, has a sufficient share in the private
ownership of machines to derive sufficient subsistence from their
productivity. In this automated industrial society, each man, as an
owner of machines, would be in the same position as an owner of
slaves in a slave society. As a capitalist, he would be an economi-
cally free man, free from exploitation by other men, free from des-
titution or want, free from the drudgery of mechanical work––and
so free to live well if he has the virtue to do so.9
Such a society would be a truly classless society, and the very
opposite of the class-divided society of the socialist state, in which
a despotic bureaucracy constitutes a ruling and owning class as
9 The conception of the machine as an inanimate slave is a familiar thought in
our industrial society. But the implications of this idea are seldom, if ever, fol-
lowed through to their ultimate conclusion, which is that, like the few who were
slave owners in the past, it is now possible for all men to be economically free by
acquiring property in the automated machine slaves of the future. On the one
hand, Norman Thomas, writing of the future of socialism, says, “Socialism be-
lieves that men may be free by making power-driven machinery the slave of
mankind” (After the New Deal, What?, New York, 1936: p. 157). But in spite of
the fact that the economically free men of the past derived their freedom from
owning capital, often including slaves, Thomas as a socialist believes that univer-
sal freedom––economic independence and security for all––can be achieved
without the private ownership of capital. On the other hand, in a recent speech,
Roger Blough, Chairman of the Board of the United States Steel Corporation,
cites a reference by the London Economist to machines as “inanimate slaves.” He
recommends multiplying them in order to produce more and to distribute more
widely the greater wealth produced in the form of a higher standard of living for
all; but he does not implement and expand this recommendation by proposing
to make all men free by diffusing as widely as possible the individual and private
ownership of our inanimate slaves.
40
against the mass of the workers who have no economic independ-
ence or any effective political power. Even were we to accept at its
face value the claim that the dictatorship of the proletariat creates a
“classless society,” it would be a classless society of propertyless
workers. In contrast, the classless society of capitalism, the image
of which we have projected from Aristotle’s extraordinary fantasy,
would be a classless society of masters not slaves, of propertied
men able to enjoy leisure, not of propertyless men still engaged in
toil.
Such a classless society fulfills the ideal of economic democ-
racy. All its members would be economically free and equal, even
as in a political democracy all men enjoy political freedom and
equality. Just as the status of citizenship conferred upon all has
achieved political democracy, so the individual and private owner-
ship of capital by all households would achieve economic democ-
racy.
This ideal can become a practical reality to whatever extent an
actual society is able (1) to reduce human toil to the minimum
through a proper use of automation; (2) to approximate a universal
diffusion of private property in the capital instruments of produc-
tion; and (3) to educate its members to devote themselves not only
to the wise management and productive use of their productive
property, but also to the pursuits of leisure and the production of
the goods of civilization.
41
3 SOME PROBLEMS TO BE SOLVED
Three problems confront us when we try to think through what is
involved in creating an economically free and classless society.
THE PROBLEM OF ORGANIZING PRODUCTION
How shall industry be organized so that no man works primarily
for the good of another, and so that each man has some voice in
the conduct of economic affairs analogous to the voice he exer-
cises in political affairs as a citizen?
Even if most of the purely subsistence work is done by ma-
chines, it is still possible for men to be used and managed as if they
were machines or slaves.
How can this be avoided without, at the same time, sacrificing
efficiency in the management of large-scale industrial enterprises?
THE PROBLEM OF DIFFUSING OWNERSHIP
How shall the ownership of productive property be so diffused
that every man or family obtains subsistence, for the most part, as
42
a result of his or its participation in the production of wealth by
means other than, or in addition to, toil?
THE PROBLEM OF LIBERTY AND EQUALITY
Here we face a number of questions.
How shall the whole sphere of economic activity be properly
subordinated to political institutions and the affairs of government
in such a way that the false extremes of totalitarianism and indi-
vidualism are both avoided?
What must be done to avoid the concentrations of political and
economic power which threaten freedom? Must not Montesquieu’s
principle of the separation of the powers of government be applied
above all to the separation of economic and political power? How
shall we achieve the requisite political regulation and direction of
economic processes and yet avoid state ownership of the means of
production and political control of the distribution of wealth?
In order to understand these problems; beyond that, in order
to understand how the two most revolutionary societies in the
world today, the United States and Soviet Russia, have thus far
failed to solve these problems; and finally, in order to understand
how the capitalist revolution can solve them, it is necessary to con-
sider the basic elements in the production and distribution of
wealth, together with the role of property and the rights of owner-
ship in the organization of an economy.
In Chapter Four, we shall, therefore, present what we regard as
an elementary analysis of (1) the factors in the production of
wealth; (2) the role of man as a factor in the production of wealth;
(3) the productivity of labor; (4) the forms of property; and (5)
primary and secondary distribution. Then, in Chapter Five, we shall
explain why property is the only basis for participating in the pro-
duction and distribution of wealth; and in the light of that, we shall
43
state the three principles of economic justice which are the ground
plan of the capitalist revolution.
With this done, we shall present, in Chapter Six, a classification
of all historic economies. In terms of that classification, we shall be
able to describe the present stage of the American economy as wa-
vering at the crossroads which leads either to the socialist or to the
capitalist revolution.
44
4 ELEMENTARY ECONOMICS
FACTORS IN THE PRODUCTION OF WEALTH
The factors of production fall into three main categories: (1) natu-
ral resources, (2) human labor, and (3) inanimate instruments made
by man. Each of these can be further subdivided as follows.
Natural resources include (a) agricultural and mineral land, the
sea and air, and the raw (unprocessed) materials derived from
them; (b) all sources of natural power, e.g., water power, electrical
power, solar power, atomic power, etc.; and (c) the power and skill
of domesticated animals.
Human beings engaged in subsistence work contribute (a)
physical power analogous to the power of animals or other sources
of natural power, such as waterfalls; (b) mechanical skill, which
consists in the direction or control of such power as is needed to pro-
duce wealth; and (c) creative skill, which consists in the invention
or improvement of things, including the nonhuman factors in pro-
duction, or in the organization and management of the productive
forces derived from all the productive factors involved.
45
Inanimate instruments can be divided into (a) hand tools,
which merely increase human productive power or skill; (b)
power-driven machines, which replace men to some extent as
sources of skill and which replace men and animals as sources of
productive power, generally supplying more productive power than
can be derived from animals and men; and (c) automatic machines,
which not only replace men and animals as sources of productive
power and provide vastly more power than either, but also replace
men as sources of productive skill and, in addition, contribute to
the productive process as a whole––skills that are entirely beyond
the capacity of men and animals to develop.
The fact that power-driven machines are a source of produc-
tive power vastly in excess of the power that can be supplied by
animals and men makes possible the production of goods that
cannot be produced by man power and animal power. The fact
that automatic machines contribute skills entirely beyond the ca-
pacity of men and animals to develop enables capital instruments
to produce forms of wealth undreamed of in pre-industrial socie-
ties.
This analysis of the factors in the production of wealth calls for
two further comments. The first is that all these factors can be
graded on a scale from complete passivity, at one extreme, to complete
activity, at the other.
Thus, mineral land and hand tools are completely passive fac-
tors in production. In contrast, agricultural land, the various natural
sources of power, the power and skill of domesticated animals, and
power-driven machines are more or less active factors in produc-
tion. This is indicated by the fact that agricultural land produces
fruit and grain without man’s help, and by the fact that the farmer,
as an active worker, co-operates with nature as an active factor in
production. So, too, the industrial worker or machine tender
co-operates with the power-driven machine, which is an active fac-
46
tor in production to whatever extent it contributes power and
built-in skills or controls to the productive process.10
At the other extreme, man is the only completely active factor
in production, whether he contributes power alone, or both power
and skill. Automatic machinery, which requires the least co-
operation from men, is the closest approximation to man himself
as an active productive factor on the level of subsistence work that
is mechanical in quality. But, while automatic machinery can re-
place men in almost all productive tasks that are mechanical, and
can perform productive tasks that men cannot perform at all,
automata cannot perform even the simplest liberal task which in-
volves creative intelligence; and so they cannot replace men who
do work that is liberal in quality, even where its purpose is the pro-
duction of wealth.
Theoretically, all mechanical work can be done by fully auto-
mated machines. This is a commonplace among students of auto-
mation. But as a practical matter, there will always be millions of
mechanical tasks that will be performed by men, either because
they are not especially difficult or because of the inherent cost or
difficulty involved in technologically eliminating them. Neverthe-
less, as scientists and technicians extend man’s ability to make capi-
tal instruments perform the tasks of producing subsistence, the
relative number of uneliminated mechanical workers will diminish.
10 In the Report on Manufactures, issued by the Secretary of the Treasury in
1791, Alexander Hamilton summarizes one of the arguments for the superior
productiveness of agricultural labor as maintaining “that in the productions of
soil, nature co -operates with man; and that the effect of their joint labor must be
greater than that of the labor of man alone.” He co unters this by saying that in
manufacturing, human labor co -operates with productive machinery, as in agri-
culture it co -operates with productive nature. Machinery, he says, “is an artificial
force brought in aid of the natural force of man; and, to all the purposes of la-
bor, is an increase of hands––an accession of strength, unencumbered, too, by
the expense of maintaining the laborer.” See The People Shall Judge, Chicago, 1953:
Vol. 1, pp. 404, 406.
47
THE ROLE OF MAN AS A FACTOR
IN THE PRODUCTION OF WEALTH
We have seen that man as a factor in the production of wealth is a
source of physical power and mechanical skill (i.e., control). While
at one extreme the use of human productive power with little or no
skill (e.g., the slave turning a grinding wheel or hauling ore from a
mine by hand) has now become quite rare, the opposite extreme
has become less rare. We can find numerous examples of the use
of human skill to control productive power which is wholly derived
from nonhuman sources (e.g., the control skill of those who oper-
ate power-driven machines). In the middle range of tasks that are
mechanical in quality, the human worker contributes some power
as well as some control. These tasks vary from one extreme, at
which the contribution needed is mainly power, to the other ex-
treme, at which it is mainly control.
In the process by which technological improvements shift the
burden of production from workers to capital instruments, both
the power and the skills previously contributed by workers are af-
fected.
With respect to the power employed in production, a twofold
change takes place. On the one hand, the physical or muscular
power demanded of workers is reduced to a minute fraction of
that required in pre-industrial production.11 On the other hand,
enormous sources of natural power which can operate only
through capital instruments are harnessed.
11 It is estimated that human muscle power now accounts for approximately 1
percent of the energy used in production. See America’s Needs and Resources, The
Twentieth Century Fund, New York, 1955: p. 908.
48
With respect to skills, the earliest of our modern capital in-
struments––such as the spinning jenny, the sewing machine, and
the calculating machine––eliminated certain skills. As machines
became more complex, frequently through the process of coupling
together several separate machines to perform related steps in a
single process, the elimination of skills became more pronounced.
Finally, in the application of the principles of closed-loop automa-
tion, the ultimate impact of technological advance upon human
skill becomes clear. Through the use of a formidable array of de-
vices, ranging from simple relay mechanisms to versatile analogue
and digital computers, the skills contributed by workers in earlier
production processes are totally eliminated; and, in addition, proc-
esses and products themselves may be redesigned to take advan-
tage of a new order of electronic and mechanical “skills” lying far
beyond the range of human competence.
We have seen one other thing that is of great significance here.
In the production of wealth, men contribute some creative skills,
such as those involved in the invention and improvement of ma-
chines and in the repairing of machines. Let us call these skills
“technical.” In addition, there are the skills which consist in the
arts of organizing and administering the productive process as a
whole, involving all the factors in production, including the em-
ployment and direction of technical skills, capital instruments, and
the power and skill of operating personnel. Let us call these skills
“managerial.” In contradistinction to technical and managerial
skills, we shall continue to use the word “mechanical” for all the
noncreative skills that men contribute to the productive process.
With these distinctions in mind, we can construct a classifica-
tion of all human work. It is set forth in the following table.
49
Character of the Work Type Of Worker
I. Work that is liberal in aim
and creative in quality
II. Subsistence work that is
creative in quality
For example, pure scientists, philoso-
phers, statesmen, clergymen, fine art-
ists, teachers, etc.
Technicians and managers engaged in
the production of wealth; and also
lawyers, physicians, etc. whose ser-
vices are incidental to the production
of wealth. The tasks performed here
are no more mechanical than the
tasks performed in the creative work
that is productive of civilization
rather than of subsistence.
III. Work that is liberal in
aim but mechanical in quality
For example, clerical assistants to leg-
islators, scientists, or teachers en-
gaged in the performance of tasks for
which machines can be substituted.
IV. Subsistence work that is
mechanical in quality
Men who contribute muscular power
or noncreative skills, or both, to the
production of wealth, whether they
do so exclusively by their own labor
or work with hand tools or power-
driven machines.
50
Now let us focus our attention on all forms of mechanical
work, in which noncreative skills or muscular power, or both, are
the worker’s predominant contribution to the production of
wealth. What we are about to say applies to mechanical work that
assists the production of the goods of civilization, as well as me-
chanical work that produces wealth; but it is of major interest to us
in the sphere of the production of wealth.
There currently exists a great deal of loose talk about the in-
creasing productivity of human labor, where by “human labor” is
meant purely mechanical subsistence work. One of the basic con-
tributions of the theory set forth in Capitalism consists in cutting
through all this loose talk, much of which is self-serving on the
part of labor, self-deceptive on the part of management, and fuzzy
analysis on the part of theorists who have perpetrated or encour-
aged it.12
The truth of the matter is simply that, over the whole period of
man’s historic life as a producer of wealth, “human labor” (i.e.,
men engaged in purely mechanical work) is either a constant or a di-
minishing source of productive power, and a diminishing source of productive
skill. The progressive diminution of man’s productive skills as a
mechanical worker is correlated with the progressive increase in the
productive skills embodied in machinery. The constancy or decline
of man as a source of productive power is an absolute fact. It has
nothing at all to do with the harnessing or development of other
forms of productive power. It merely reflects the inherent limita-
12 Capitalism, to be published in the coming year, contains an analysis of the “in-
creasing productivity” of workers which shows that in fact the inherent produc-
tiveness of labor, other than managerial and technical labor, has remained stable
or has declined since the beginning of the industrial revolution, and that its
economic productivity is far below the level indicated by the share of the na-
tional wealth received by workers.
51
tions of man as a physical organism allowing, of course, for varia-
tions from the average, as men are graded individually in strength
and dexterity. Looking at mankind across the centuries, we see evi-
dence that, on the average, man is a less powerful productive force
today than he was in earlier times.
But though, absolutely speaking, the average unit of labor power
must remain a constant quantity in the production of wealth (at
least so long as the human physique remains what it is), the average
unit of labor power is a relatively diminishing quantity in the course
of progressive industrialization. Let us state this fundamental truth
in another way.
In the industrial production of wealth, i.e., in machine produc-
tion, there are, as we have seen, three main types of human work-
ers: (1) mechanical workers; (2) technical workers; and (3) manage-
rial workers. Of these three, the first perform purely mechanical
tasks. The last two perform tasks most of which are not mechani-
cal and cannot be mechanized.
Just as the individual productive contribution of mechanical
workers accounts for less of the total wealth produced in a highly
industrialized economy than it does in a nonindustrialized econ-
omy or in one which represents a primitive stage of industrializa-
tion, so the individual productive contribution of technical and
managerial workers accounts for more of the total wealth produced
in a highly industrialized society than it does under primitive indus-
trial conditions. Proportionately more technical and managerial
man-hours are required, and more highly developed managerial
and technical skills are called for, as industrialization becomes
technologically more advanced. The available evidence further in-
dicates that the economic productivity of managerial and technical
workers––at least under conditions of relatively full employment––
is higher today than at any previous time in our economic history.
The primary reason for the latter fact is undoubtedly that tech-
nical and managerial skills are responsible for the invention, im-
provement, and efficient operation of the machinery which, rela-
52
tive to other factors, has become more and more productive with
progressive industrialization.
It follows, therefore, that with progressive industrialization and
with the increasing productiveness of the economy as a whole, the
relative productiveness of mechanical work diminishes and the
relative productiveness of technical and managerial work increases,
as measured by the contribution each makes to the total wealth
produced.13
A TECHNICAL NOTE ON THE PRODUCTIVITY OF LABOR
In particular cases, new highly skilled workers are frequently called
upon to replace greater numbers of relatively unskilled workers.
But, in proportion to the wealth produced, the aggregate of skills
eliminated is invariably greater than the new skills called into exis-
tence. Concurrently, the relative expenditure of human energy, as
compared with the inanimate energy employed in production, con-
stantly diminishes. Since these are the elements which submanage-
rial and subtechnical workers contribute to production, the annual
increase in “productivity,” or output per man-hour, has consis-
tently represented a relatively increasing physical contribution by
capital instruments and a relatively decreasing physical contribution
by workers to the total product.14
13 It is entirely possible that, in a period of extensive unemployment, the eco-
nomic productivity of managerial and technical labor (i.e., the market value of
managerial and technical services) might decline proportionately more than the
economic productivity of mechanical labor. This could result from a widespread
struggle on the part of mechanical workers to upgrade their qualifications for
highly coveted managerial and technical positions. The resulting increase in the
number of qualified managerial and technical workers, by affecting the supply
side of the equation, would lower the managerial utility of the services rendered
by these types of workers, and so would lower their economic productivity or
distributive share.
14 Labor today frequently comes close to acknowledging that it is not seeking to
produce more in order to increase its distributive share, but that it is merely
53
When we consider that this change has been going on since the
first century, and has been proceeding at a rapid pace since the end
of the eighteenth century, it is clear that the actual physical contri-
bution of labor to the production of wealth is now extremely small
as compared with that of capital instruments. It is, if anything, an
underestimation rather than an exaggeration to say that the aggre-
gate physical contribution to the production of wealth by workers
in the United States today accounts for less than 10 percent of the
wealth produced, and that the contribution by the owners of capi-
tal instruments, through their capital instruments, accounts in physical
terms for more than 90 percent of the wealth produced. All avail-
able statistical evidence tends to show that these figures greatly
overestimate the extent to which labor contributes today to the
production of wealth.15
One further point remains to be mentioned. It appears that the
economic productivity of labor has also declined, and that the de-
cline is probably of the same order as the decline in inherent pro-
ductiveness.
By “inherent productiveness” we mean the physical ability or
capacity of a factor of production to produce goods or services. By
“economic productivity” we mean the distributive share of the
seeking to share in the increased wealth produced by capital instruments. The
collective bargaining agreement in effect in 1957 between General Motors and
the AFL-CIO United Auto Workers, for example, recites that “to produce more
with the same amount of human effort is a sound economic and social objective.”
Nevertheless, the agreement provided for substantially increased compensation
of workers over pre-existing wages and benefits.
15 From 1850 to the present, the average rate of increase in output per
man-hour, measured in terms of national income per man-hour in 1950 prices,
has been in excess of 2 percent per annum. (See America’s Needs and Resources,
Table 14, p. 40.) Although statistical evidence is lacking for the period prior to
1850, many of the most spectacular advances in industrialization were made
prior to that date. These included the use of water power for mass production,
wind power for propelling vessels and pumping water, sewing machines, the
flying shuttle, steam pumping machines, the spinning jenny, the boring machine,
the use of the steam engine as a prime mover, the gas engine, the cotton gin, the
hydraulic press, etc.
54
wealth produced that goes in a free market to an owner of a par-
ticular factor of production as a direct result of his contribution to
production, its magnitude being evaluated through the mechanism
of supply and demand in a freely competitive market. Thus the
term “economic productivity” involves not only the physical con-
tribution of the factor in question, but also the competitively de-
termined market value of that physical contribution.
Where the value of labor is competitively determined (even al-
lowing for true collective bargaining, which merely establishes a
balance of the power as between the employed and the employer
and leaves the employer free to employ others if he believes better
terms can be made), the wage determination is automatically a de-
termination of the value of labor’s contribution to the final prod-
uct. But since we live in an economy characterized by redistributive
taxes, the combined power of unions and the countervailing power
they receive from government, and various potent political devices
that artificially stimulate consumer demand in order to provide full
employment, there is no statistical evidence from which we can
compute the actual economic productivity of labor in America to-
day. We can only draw inferences from the magnitude of the
means employed to prevent the competitive fixing of wages and to
increase the employment of labor. We can also draw inferences of
a negative sort, with regard to the relative economic productivity of
capital instruments, by considering the incomes still received by the
owners of capital after all the foregoing forces have diverted from
the owners of capital and to the owners of labor a large portion of
the wealth produced by capital instruments.16
16 An extensive analysis of these points is presented in Capitalism. That analysis
explains the apparent divergence between the declining economic productivity
of labor and labor’s increasing distributive share of the wealth produced. For
those who mistakenly suppose that present wage levels are an accurate index of
labor’s economic productivity, a brief summary of the explanation is given in the
Appendix on the concealment of the declining productivity of labor in our pre-
sent economy. See pp. 256-265, infra.
55
THE FORMS OF PROPERTY
By property we mean that which a man possesses, together with a
right to control it, use it, derive benefits from it, or dispose of it, in
any lawful manner that he wishes. With regard to property, we
would like to make two distinctions.
(1) The first distinction is between innate and acquired prop-
erty. Innate property is that which a man possesses as part of his
own nature, together with a right to its control. So far as property
having economic significance is concerned, the only form of innate
property is the productiveness that is inherent in a man’s bodily
strength and mental skill.
We shall use the word “labor power” for a man’s productive
abilities in the sphere of subsistence goods, without regard to the
proportions of physical strength and mental skill that are involved,
and without regard to whether, in the production of such goods, it
is used to do work that is mechanical or creative in quality. Though
all men are innately equipped with labor power, a chattel slave is a
man who has been deprived of property in his own labor power,
since the right to control it is legally vested in his master and
owner, not in himself. The legal rights of the master are, of course,
in violation of natural law, since every man has a natural right to
his own labor power as well as to life and liberty.17
17 In his second treatise On Civil Government, Locke uses the word “property” in a
broad sense to designate all the things to which man has either a natural or an
acquired right: his natural right to life and liberty, on the one hand; and his right
to the estate he has acquired, on the other. The word “property” in a narrow and
economic sense is more frequently restricted to a man’s estate, i.e., the property
he has acquired by his own labor, by exchange, by gift or inheritance. When men
are chattel slaves, the labor power inherent in them is a form of acquired prop-
erty, owned by other men, just as the productive power of land, animals, and
tools is owned. In contrast to chattel slaves, free men own their own labor
power, to use and dispose of it, or its products, as they will. Hence to say that
the subjection of men to slave labor is a violation of natural right is equivalent to
saying that men have a natural right, not only to life and liberty, but also to the
ownership of the labor power which is inherent in their bodily frame and mental
competence.
56
Acquired property consists in all things external to a man’s
own person, which he not only possesses but also establishes his
right to control. Writing with a pre-industrial economy in mind,
John Locke enunciated the fundamental truth that it is a man’s use
of his own innate labor power which is the basis of his appropria-
tion of the things which God gave to all men in common.18
Locke’s labor theory of property must never be confused with
Marx’s labor theory of value. Locke is concerned only with explain-
ing the origin of acquired property rights at that starting point in hu-
man affairs when men first appropriated the land they tilled or the
tools they made.
Starting with everything in common, men rightfully appropri-
ated those things with which they mixed their labor power or
which were exclusively the fruits of their own toil. In that original
appropriation, it was a man’s use of the only productive property
he had (i.e., his innate labor power) that gave him title to acquired
property in the things he used his innate property to produce. Go-
ing beyond that original appropriation, it is possible to generalize
Locke’s theory by saying that, apart from gift or inheritance, a
man’s right to acquired property derives from the productive use
of such property as he already owns, whether that is his own labor
power, his land, or his stock of workable materials and working
instrumentalities.
(2) The second distinction involves a threefold classification of
the forms of productive property, i.e., the ownership and control of
factors productive of wealth. It is as follows:
(a) Property in natural resources (including mineral and agri-
cultural land, resources reclaimed from the sea or air, raw
materials, natural sources of power and domesticated ani-
mals).
(b) Property in instruments of production (including proc-
essed materials as well as hand tools, power-driven ma-
18 See On Civil Government, Ch. V, “Of Property.”
57
chines and automatic machines) and in productive organi-
zations.
(c) Property in human labor power (including the acquired la-
bor power of other men who are owned as slaves, as well
as one’s own innately possessed labor power).
With this classification in mind, we can now say how in the fol-
lowing pages we shall use the words “capital” and “labor.” Exclud-
ing slave labor as having no place, by need or right, in a capitalist
society, we shall use the word “labor” for the third form of pro-
ductive property, i.e., the property each man has in his own labor
power; and we shall unite the first two forms of productive prop-
erty mentioned above under the head of “capital.” Capital thus
represents all forms of acquired property in productive factors; and,
excluding chattel slavery, labor represents the one form of innate
property in a factor productive of wealth.19
Both capital and labor can either be widely diffused among the
members of a society or highly concentrated in the hands of a few.
In the slave societies of the past, the ownership of labor as well as
the ownership of capital was concentrated in the hands of a small
master class. With the abolition of chattel slavery, there can be
concentrated ownership of capital alone; for the ownership of la-
bor is universally diffused––each individual having property in his
own labor.
Finally, it is of the utmost importance to recognize that prop-
erty is not the same as private property. By private property we
should understand that which is owned and controlled by individu-
19 The wealth of a society includes: (1) its fund of consumable goods; (2) its
stock pile of combustible or expendable implements of war; (3) the cumulative
fund of productive knowledge that its people have acquired or have ready access
to, and which is the common possession of all members of the society except as
it may be limited by patent or copyright laws; and (4) all the materials and in-
struments it has available to employ in the production of consumables and co m-
bustibles. The last of these, the so-called means of production, divides into the
three forms of productive property mentioned above.
58
als, families, or private corporations, no matter how large. By public
property we should understand that which is owned by the State
and controlled by its officers or agencies––the persons through
whom the State acts. As contrasted with property, private or pub-
lic, there is that which is common (i.e., not proper to any individual
or corporation, including the State).
Common pasture land––as the Boston Common, for example–
was owned by no one; no one had any right of control. The common
represents the opposite of property (i.e., that which is appropriated
by someone who then exercises exclusive control over it), just as,
within the sphere of the proper, public property represents the oppo-
site of private property.
The Marxist program for the abolition of private property calls
for the State ownership of capital (i.e., all means of production
other than labor power). It does not call for the abolition of prop-
erty or for the diffusion of the ownership of capital, but rather for
the transformation of private capital into public property and for
the abolition of private property in everything except labor power
and consumable goods in the hands of the consumer.
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY DISTRIBUTION
By “primary distribution of wealth” we understand the distribution
of wealth to those who have produced it. In the simplest case of
the solitary producer (e.g., the Robinson Crusoe economy), this
means that the individual directly and automatically acquires the
wealth he has produced by his labor and by the use of whatever
capital instruments he possesses. In the normal case of the econ-
omy of a complex society, in which large numbers of men are as-
sociated in the production of wealth and in which they exchange
one kind of product for another, usually through the medium of
money, the income each individual receives as a result of his par-
ticipation in production represents his share of the primary distri-
59
bution of wealth in that society. In a market economy in which the
value of each contribution to production, whether in the form of
land or raw materials, capital or labor, is evaluated objectively and
impartially through the processes of supply and demand in freely
competitive markets, primary distribution awards to each partici-
pant precisely the equivalent of what he would have received as a
solitary producer: the wealth which his participation in production created.
As distinguished from primary distribution so conceived, we
understand “secondary distribution of wealth” to include all trans-
fers of wealth other than those which result from participation in
production and the exchanges consequent thereto that take place
in free markets. Secondary distribution, therefore, covers transfers
of wealth within families or between friends by gift or by inheri-
tance or by will, transfers through losing or finding, transfers from
the public domain, transfers of previously produced property after
it has come into the hands of an ultimate consumer, eleemosynary
distributions of all sorts, etc.
To the extent that any of the contributions to production are
not evaluated through the operation of supply and demand in a
freely competitive market, the distribution which results from par-
ticipation in production may be (1) less than the value of the con-
tribution made, or (2) more than its value. In either case, the dif-
ference between the competitively determined value of the contri-
bution and what is received for it (in wages, dividends, payments
for materials, etc.) represents a secondary distribution of wealth in
favor of the party who gets more than the value his contribution
would have been determined to have in a freely competitive mar-
ket.
The importance of this distinction between primary and sec-
ondary distribution will be seen in the next chapter where we shall
set forth three principles of justice applicable to the production
and distribution of wealth. None of these principles applies to sec-
ondary distribution. The only questions of justice with which we
shall be concerned relate to the primary distribution of wealth––
60
the distribution that is integrally connected with participation in the
production of wealth.”20
Before we turn to these questions of justice, one problem
about the distribution of wealth remains to be considered. It has to
do with the distribution of wealth to those members of society
who are engaged in what we have called liberal work rather than
subsistence work. We pointed out in Chapter Two that statesmen,
fine artists, pure scientists, philosophers, members of the clergy,
some lawyers, some physicians, some teachers, some journalists,
etc., do not directly contribute to the production of wealth, i.e., the
goods of subsistence. The creative work they do is productive of
the goods of civilization and of the human spirit––the liberal arts
and sciences, the institutions of the state and of religion.
There are hundreds of thousands of such persons in our soci-
ety and the great majority of them support themselves and their
families by the incomes they receive in the form of honoraria, fees,
and other payments for their services or for what they produce.
Is such income a part of the primary distribution of wealth in
our society in spite of the fact that, in the light of our distinction
between subsistence work and liberal work, these persons are not
participating in the production of wealth?
At first glance, it would appear either (1) that we were in error
in classifying the creative work of statesmen, fine artists, pure sci-
entists, philosophers, etc., as something totally apart from the pro-
duction of wealth, or (2) that the incomes received by a large num-
ber of liberal workers in our economy are not part of the primary
distribution of our society’s wealth, but fall rather under its secon-
dary distribution. In the second alternative, the three principles of
economic justice with which we are concerned would not seem to
apply to their activities.
Neither of these alternatives leads us to the correct solution of
the problem. In essence, those activities which we have called lib-
20 There are, of course, other principles of justice that are applicable to the sec-
ondary distribution of wealth.
61
eral, or forms of leisure work, do lie totally outside the field of the
production of wealth. A society is conceivable in which such activi-
ties would be carried on for the inherent satisfactions or intrinsic
rewards to which they give rise, and without any need or desire for
extrinsic compensation of the kind that must be given those who
engage in the production of wealth, especially in such activities
connected with it as are intrinsically unrewarding because they are
in no sense creative. But for the most part our society does not
operate in this manner, though the technological advances which
are now foreseeable make it possible for it to become a society in
which a great deal of the leisure work that is the work of civiliza-
tion will be done without need for extrinsic compensation. The
realization of that possibility is, as we shall see, one of the primary
goals of the capitalist revolution.
In a free society, such as ours, wealth is anything that is re-
garded as wealth by a significant number of persons. Anything
which is prized for its exchange value and which is bought, sold,
exchanged, or systematically collected and exchanged among col-
lectors, is thereby empirically determined to be wealth. This is true
whether those who so treat the goods or services involved are mo-
tivated by the inherent qualities of these goods or services, their
usefulness or ability to satisfy needs, their ability to produce wealth,
or their ability to satisfy sentimental interests.
It is market demand which gives items of wealth their market
value. It is the free play of the forces of demand upon the sources
of supply that objectively and impartially determines the exchange
value of whatever things are regarded as items of exchangeable
wealth. But something further than a demand for particular goods
or services is necessary for it to be regarded as an item of wealth
rather than one of the goods of civilization which lies totally out-
side the sphere of wealth. It must be something which, by the
common consent of those who own or furnish it and those who
seek it, is regarded and treated as subject to purchase and sale, or
exchange.
62
Let us illustrate this point. The charms of a virtuous woman
are not an item of wealth, for no matter how highly and widely
they are prized, they will not be sold and so they cannot be bought.
The same holds true of works of art, scientific discoveries, the ser-
vices of teachers, physicians, statesmen, etc., to whatever extent
those who create such things or render such services refuse to sell
them at any price. Under such conditions, they are not only in es-
sence goods of civilization, but they are also kept from becoming
items of wealth.
However, under other conditions, goods or services that are
essentially goods of the spirit or of civilization and not at all goods
of subsistence, do become items of wealth. Such things are bought
and sold in our society for the simple reason that the creation of
such goods or the rendering of such services is generally the sole or
principal source of income for those engaged in these creative, lib-
eral activities of leisure work.
However, there are a sufficient number of exceptions to con-
firm the fundamental insight that the goods produced or the ser-
vices rendered by those engaged in liberal work are properly re-
garded as no part of wealth and, therefore, cannot be bought be-
cause they will not be sold. There are, for example, some artists,
scientists, and philosophers who have enough income from their
capital estates to enable them to engage in liberal work for satisfac-
tions that are wholly above monetary compensation. There are
men who are financially able to serve their country in political of-
fice without any compensation beyond the nominal pay of a dollar
a year. There are teachers, physicians and lawyers who render ser-
vices of various kinds to their society solely for the creative satis-
faction it gives them, even where they might have sought pay and
might have treated their creative work as if it were productive of
wealth.
At the opposite extreme, we must recognize the fact that there
are many men who possess adequate capital estates and who take
such compensation as they can get for the liberal work they do as
educators, scientists, criminal lawyers, physicians, highly paid pub-
63
lic officials, etc. In addition, it is often the case that these men are
able to retain little or nothing of such compensation because of
their already being in a high income tax bracket. These men repre-
sent the ultimate in failure or refusal to distinguish between (1)
items of wealth which are property subject to purchase and sale,
and (2) the goods of civilization which should be entirely above the
market place.
Therefore, the solution of this problem is not to be found in
obliterating the essentially sound distinction between the goods of
subsistence and the goods of civilization, nor in excluding the
payments made to men who do essentially liberal work from the
primary distribution of wealth, thereby making certain principles of
economic justice inapplicable to liberal work that is extrinsically
compensated. The ultimate solution lies rather in the transforma-
tion of our society that the capitalist revolution aims to bring
about––a transformation that will enable an ever increasing part of
the liberal work which creates civilization to be done without any
extrinsic compensation for it.
64
5 ECONOMIC JUSTICE
AND ECONOMIC RIGHTS
PROPERTY AND JUSTICE
It has often been said that where there is no property, there can be
neither justice nor injustice. The statement is usually meant to ap-
ply with complete generality to everything that belongs to a man
by right––that which is his own or proper to him, whether innate
or acquired.
As thus interpreted, the statement covers more than economic
property and economic justice. We are here concerned only with
the application of it to economic affairs, and especially to the dis-
tribution of wealth as that is related to the production of wealth.
We are, therefore, excluding from consideration, as having no
bearing on the justice of distribution, such wealth as a man obtains
by charity or gift on which he has, prior to its receipt, no just claim,
as well as the wealth he may obtain by seizure, theft, or other
65
means by which he unjustly appropriates what does not belong to
him.21
The question with which we are first of all concerned is how a
man who already has some property––in the form of his own labor
power, capital instruments, or both––can justly acquire additional
property.
This question presupposes that if a man has no property at
all—that is, if in violation of his natural rights, he is a chattel slave
deprived of innate property in his labor power––he may justly claim
to have that innate property restored to him; but until it is restored,
he has no property whereby he can justly acquire further property.
The underlying proposition is twofold: on the one hand, when
a man has no property rights in factors productive of particular
wealth, he can have no basis for a just claim to property rights in
the wealth so produced; on the other hand, when he owns as his
property all of the instruments of production engaged in producing
particular wealth, he can lay just claim to all the wealth so pro-
duced.
From this it follows that if several men together employ their
respective property in the production of wealth, each man’s just
share in the distribution of the total wealth produced is propor-
tionate to the contribution each has made by the use of his prop-
erty toward the production of that wealth. It must be repeated
once more that it is only through his productive property––his
21 Since property in things includes the right of control and disposition in any
lawful manner, the laws relating to the transfer of property at death by will or by
intestate distribution are merely regulative of special types of transfers of prop-
erty by an owner. It is frequently said that the right to inherit or to receive prop-
erty by will is purely artificial or statutory, meaning that it is not based on natural
right. While no one has a natural right to receive property by will or inheritance
(because no one, as a matter of justice, has a right to receive a gift), the owner of
property does have a natural right to control and dispose of it. The justice of
laws regulating transfers by will, and therefore of the laws regulating inheritance
(which are by custom relied upon as substitutes for affirmative disposition by
will), must be measured by the standards governing the relations between the
State and the owners of property.
66
capital instruments or his labor power––that a man can participate
in the production of wealth as an independent contributor. The slave
whose labor power is owned and used by his master is not an inde-
pendent contributor; hence he cannot, as a matter of strict justice,
claim any share in the distribution of the wealth produced.
Two hypothetical cases will help us to clarify this basic point.
They are stated in terms of the so-called Crusoe economy, a device
so often used in the literature of economics.
(1) Imagine first the economy of Robinson Crusoe, before the
advent of Friday but after he has taken possession of the island,
domesticated a few animals, devised some hand tools, etc. All the
further wealth he produces comes from the productive use of Cru-
soe’s own capital and labor power. Part of Crusoe’s output may be
additional capital goods; the rest, consumables. To whom does it
all belong? No one would hesitate for a second to give the one and
only right answer: Crusoe. A man is justly entitled to all the wealth he
himself produces.
(2) Imagine next the same island economy complicated by two
additional factors. One is Friday, who, for the purposes of the ex-
ample, shall be Crusoe’s chattel slave in violation of his natural
rights. The other additional factor is another man, by the name of
Smith, whom Crusoe does not enslave. Since Crusoe owns the is-
land, all the capital goods thereon, and the one available slave,
Smith enters into an arrangement with Crusoe whereby he will par-
ticipate in the production of wealth by contributing his own labor
power for which, after some bargaining, it is agreed that Smith
shall receive some share in the distribution of the wealth produced.
The fact must be noted that the only way Smith can participate
in the production of wealth is by using his own property––the only
property he has, namely, his own labor power. Only by contribut-
ing his labor can Smith’s participation in the production of wealth
be the basis for a just claim to a share in the distribution of the
wealth produced.
Crusoe’s man Friday, his goat, his dog, his tools, and his land
all more or less actively participate in the production of wealth. But
67
since their participation does not involve any property on their
part, it affords no basis for their claiming a share in the distribution
of the wealth produced.
Crusoe gives his dog, his goat, and Friday enough to keep them
alive and serviceable. Since they participate in production as Cru-
soe’s property and not independently, he can rightfully claim as his
all the wealth they produce. It is his to give them as he pleases or
not. But since Smith participates in production, not as Crusoe’s
property used by Crusoe but independently and by the voluntary
use of his own labor, he has a right to claim a share in the distribu-
tion, as Friday, for example, does not.
What is Smith’s just share? Suppose, in this hypothetical case,
that it could be known that the value of Smith’s contribution to the
total production of wealth was one-tenth of the value of the total
final product, the other nine parts being contributed by Crusoe’s
own labor and capital (i.e., all the forms of productive property he
owns). On that supposition, can there be any doubt at all that
Smith’s share in the distribution should be one-tenth of the total?
If it is evident that a man is justly entitled to all the wealth he pro-
duces, does it not follow with equal clarity that, when several men
jointly produce wealth, each is justly entitled to a distributive share
that is proportionate to the value of the contribution each makes to
the production of the wealth in question?
The foregoing hypothetical cases exemplify the principle of jus-
tice with regard to the distribution of wealth to those who have
participated in its production by the use of their own productive
property––their capital or labor power, or both. They show us con-
cretely what it means to say that each independent participant is
entitled to receive a distributive share of the total wealth produced;
and that in each case the distributive share, to be just, must be
strictly proportional to the contribution that each makes toward
the production of the total wealth by the use of his own property.
This is the only principle whereby the distribution of the
wealth produced can be justly grounded on the rights of property
engaged in the production of wealth. It is furthermore the only dis-
68
tributive principle that is based on the recognition of the rights of
property in productive factors, for the essence of such property lies
in the right of the owner to receive the portion (or proportionate
share) of the wealth which the productive factor owned by him
produces.22
In order to apply this principle, we must be able to assess the
economic value of the contribution made by each of the independ-
ent participants in production. How can their economic value be
impartially or objectively determined, and determined in a way that
is consonant with the institutions of a free society? More specifi-
cally, what assesses the value of the contribution to production
made by factors A, B and C, in terms of which the owners of such
factors are entitled to receive proportionate shares of the total
wealth produced?
Our answer, in brief, is: free competition.
FREE COMPETITION AS THE DETERMINANT OF VALUE
In the opening chapter of Capital, Karl Marx announces that, in
elaborating on a theory advanced by Ricardo, he alone has solved a
problem that Aristotle first raised but failed to solve; namely, the
problem of finding an objective measure of the economic value of
goods and services, so that a just exchange of commodities is pos-
sible.
22 There are other distributive principles not based on justice or property rights.
One is the principle of charity. To continue with the example we have been us-
ing, suppose Friday had a sister who became Smith’s wife and bore him five
children. If Smith’s contribution to the production of wealth in the Crusoe
economy continued to be no more than one-tenth of the value of the total an-
nual output, his annual income would probably become woefully insufficient for
the support of his household of seven. In that case, Crusoe might give him
something to supplement the income he earned. Since Smith had not earned this
additional wealth, it would represent a charitable distribution on Crusoe’s part.
69
Marx accepts Aristotle’s principle of justice in exchange as re-
quiring that the things exchanged be of equal value. He refers ex-
plicitly to the pages of Book V on Justice in Aristotle’s Ethics, and
especially to Chapter 5 where Aristotle raises the question of how
we can equate the value of beds and houses so that a certain num-
ber of beds can be justly exchanged for a certain number of
houses.
Aristotle recognized, Marx says, that we cannot equate qualita-
tively different commodities, unless they can somehow be made
commensurable; but lacking any objective and common measure
of their exchange value, he found that there was no way to com-
mensurate qualitatively different things. Marx quotes Aristotle as
declaring that “it is impossible that such unlike things can be
commensurable”; and then adds that Aristotle “himself tells us
what barred the way to his further analysis; it was the absence of
any concept of value. What is that equal something, that common
substance which admits of the value of the beds being expressed
by a house? Such a thing, in truth, cannot exist, says Aristotle.”23
At this point, Marx offers his own solution of the problem
which, he says, Aristotle failed to solve. The objective and com-
mon measure of exchange value is human labor. According to the
labor theory of value, two qualitatively different things can be
made commensurable by measuring both by the amount of human
labor involved in their production, and when thus measured, things
of equivalent value can be justly exchanged.
Turning now to Book V, Chapter 5, of the Ethics, we find Aris-
totle saying, as Marx reports, that a just exchange of qualitatively
different things requires that they be of equivalent value; and that
23 Capital, Book I, Part I, Ch. 1, Sect. 3. “The brilliancy of Aristotle’s genius,”
Marx tells us, “is that he discovered, in the expression of the value of commodi-
ties, a relation of equality. The peculiar conditions of the society in which he
lived alone prevented him from discovering what, ‘in truth,’ was at the bottom
of this equality.” Living in a society that “was founded upon slavery, and had,
therefore, for its natural basis, the inequality of men and of their labor powers,”
Aristotle, Marx thinks, was “prevented from seeing that to attribute value to
commodities is merely a mode of expressing all labor as equal human labor.”
70
this in turn requires some way of commensurating their value. “All
goods,” Aristotle declares, “must therefore be measured by some
one thing,” and “this unit,” he then says, “is in truth demand,
which holds all things together; for if men did not need one an-
other’s goods at all, or did not need them equally, there would be
either no exchange or not an equal exchange.”24 Aristotle admits, as
Marx says, that it is impossible for the qualitatively heterogeneous
to be made perfectly commensurate; “but,” he immediately adds,
“with reference to demand they may become so sufficiently.”25
So far as we know, Marx and Aristotle offer the only recorded
solutions to the problem of how to commensurate the value of
heterogeneous things in order to determine equivalents for the
purpose of justice in exchange. If Marx’s labor theory of value is
false, as we contend it is, then Aristotle’s solution is the only one
available; and, as he says, it is sufficient for all practical purposes
even if, under actual market conditions, it falls short of perfection.
The exchange value of goods and services is, in its very nature,
a matter of opinion. Only where free and workable competition exists
does the value set on things to be exchanged reflect the free play of
the opinions of all, or at least many, potential buyers and sellers.
Any other method of determining values must involve the imposi-
tion of an arbitrary opinion of value, an opinion held by one or
more persons or an organized group; and such a determination of
value, to be effective, must be imposed by force. We submit that
the human mind can conceive of no other accurate, objective, and
24 Nicomachean Ethics, Book V, Ch. 5, 1133a27-29. We would say today not “de-
mand” but “supply and demand,” or “free competition.” However, these are
merely different expressions for the same thing.
25 Ibid., 1133b19-20. We might add that any variance between the absolutely just
relative values of two things being exchanged and the values at which they are in
fact exchanged in a particular market merely reflects variances from perfect compe-
tition in the market. Aristotle is in effect saying that the free and workable co m-
petition that is attainable in a market exempt from all monopolistic restraints
results in a determination of values which makes goods and services sufficiently
commensurable and makes just exchange possible.
71
impartial determinant of economic value, once the fallacious labor
theory of value has been discarded.
What has just been said about free competition as the only ac-
curate, objective, and impartial means of measuring the equivalence
of values for the purpose of justice in the exchange of heterogene-
ous commodities is equally applicable when the purpose is one of
measuring the relative contribution of different factors in the pro-
duction of wealth, in order to allocate a just distribution of the
wealth produced among the owners of these productive forces.26
One further point should be observed in passing. If the labor
theory of value were true––that is, if labor and labor alone were the
source of all value in economic goods and services––then labor
would be entitled, in strict justice, to the whole of the wealth pro-
duced. According to this theory, labor, either in the form of living
labor or, as Marx suggests, in the form of “congealed labor” (i.e.,
the labor that is accumulated and congealed in machines), contrib-
utes everything to the production of wealth except what nature
itself affords. Hence, everything produced would belong to labor
as a matter of just requital.27
26 In a money economy, the unit of measurement of value is, of course, the unit
of money employed.
27 Twenty years before the Communist Manifesto, the Preamble of the Mechanics’
Union of Trade Associations (Philadelphia, 1827) declared that labor was the
source of all wealth, but instead of demanding all the wealth labor produced,
they asked only for an equitable share of it, i.e., that which could be “clearly
demonstrated to be a fair and full equivalent” for the productive services they
rendered. That they did not think of a “fair and full equivalent” as all the wealth
they produced is indicated by the following passage: “We are prepared to main-
tain that all who toil have a natural and unalienable right to reap the fruits of
their own industry; and that they who by labor (the only source) are the authors
of every comfort, convenience, and luxury are in justice entitled to an equal par-
ticipation, not only in the meanest and coarsest, but likewise the richest and
choicest of them all” (italics added). Equal participation left something for the
owners of capital who did not, under this theory, contribute anything to the
production of wealth. Marx was more consistent and thorough. He carried the
labor theory of value to its logical conclusion; namely, that any return whatso-
ever to owners of capital who do not themselves work is unearned increment on
their part, obtained unjustly by the exploitation of labor.
72
Hence if the labor theory of value were true and if a just distri-
bution of wealth were to be based upon it, there would be no
problem of how to divide the wealth produced as between the
owners of property in capital and the owners of property in labor
power. Marx might then be right in arguing that capital property in
private hands should be expropriated, and in recommending that
the State, having “expropriated the expropriators,” should operate
all capital instruments for the general welfare of the working
masses, to whom all the wealth produced should then be distrib-
uted according to their individual needs.28
Since, as we maintain, the labor theory of value is false, and
capital is a producer of wealth in the same sense that labor is, all
the consequences drawn from the labor theory are wholly without
foundation. We are therefore confronted by a problem to be
solved––one which, so far as we know, has not yet been solved.
That is the problem of achieving a just distribution of the wealth
produced in an industrial society, while at the same time (1) pre-
serving the prosperity of the economy, (2) securing economic wel-
fare by a satisfactory general standard of living for all, and (3)
maintaining the economic and political freedom of the individual
members of the society.
To that problem we now turn.
28 It should be pointed out that even if the labor theory of value were true, and
even if it justified placing all capital instruments in the hands of the State so that
the wealth produced by “congealed labor” could be shared by all living laborers,
it would not provide a just principle of distribution, useful in solving the prob-
lem of what shares individual workers would be entitled to receive relative to
one another. This explains why Lenin argued against any system of distribution
that is based on the rights of workers––equal rights or unequal rights––instead of
upon their needs. See his tract entitled The State and Revolution, Moscow, 1949:
Ch. 5, especially Sects. 3 and 4.
73
THE PROBLEM OF JUSTICE AND WELFARE
IN AN INDUSTRIAL ECONOMY
If the increasing productiveness of labor were the sole source of
the increasing output of wealth per man-hour employed, labor
could justly claim a larger and larger distributive share of the total
wealth produced, by virtue of contributing more and more to its
production. An objective evaluation of the services of labor
through free competition among all relevant factors in production
would automatically award ever increasing wages as a just return
for the services of labor. As the total wealth of the economy in-
creased, the standard of living of those who worked for a living
would rise.
But as we have already pointed out, the productiveness of
submanagerial and subtechnical labor is a relatively diminishing
quantity as the productiveness of the whole economy increases
with the introduction of productive forces other than human labor.
If a competitive evaluation of the contribution of labor were then
to set wages at a level which labor could justly claim as a return for
its services, labor’s standard of living might dwindle to bare sub-
sistence or even fall below it.
Hence in an economy in which the wealth produced is distrib-
uted in accordance with the one principle of justice we have so far
considered, that principle of distributive justice might work against
the welfare of the great mass of men who work for a living, whose
only income-bearing property is their own labor power, and whose
only income takes the form of wages.
Such conflict would not necessarily occur in a pre-industrial
economy, in which human labor was the chief productive factor
and in which each man had property in his own labor power (i.e.,
no man being owned by another as a chattel slave). But the case of
an industrial economy is exactly the opposite. As the machines of
an industrial economy become more and more efficient in the pro-
duction of wealth, the problem of the conflict between distributive
74
justice and the welfare of workingmen becomes more and more
aggravated.
Before we examine the problem further, let us be sure that the
truth about the relatively diminishing productiveness of human
labor is clearly seen. The comparison of two slave economies, one
more and one less productive, will help us to compare
pre-industrial with industrial economies, and less advanced with
more advanced industrial economies. In each of these compari-
sons, the greater productiveness of one economy over the other
will clearly be seen to result from productive factors other than
mechanical labor.
Let us first consider the hypothetical case of a slave economy
in which every man is either a master or a chattel slave. Let us fur-
ther suppose that each slave owner participates in the production
of wealth without any use of his own labor power, but only
through the use of his capital property, including the slaves he
owns. On this supposition, the total wealth produced would be-
long to the slave owners; and, other things being equal, more
would go to a slave owner who used more land and slaves than to
one who had less of such property to use in the production of
wealth. Here we see a just distribution of wealth based on partici-
pation in production through the use of one’s property, no part of
which is one’s own labor power.29
Now let us consider two slave economies, Alpha and Beta, and
let us imagine them as differing in one respect and only one. The
slave owners in Alpha own beasts of burden as well as human
29 Questions about how the slave owner acquired the property he has at the be-
ginning of a particular year may be relevant to other considerations, but not to
the matter at hand. We are concerned here only with the total wealth produced
in that particular year, at the start of which two slave owners differ in the pro-
ductiveness of the capital they own. During that year, let us suppose that each
employs his property to its fullest productive capacity, and neither contributes
his own labor. At the end of that year, the man with the more highly productive
capital employed is entitled to a larger share of the total wealth produced than
the man with less productive capital involved, for his property has made a larger
contribution toward its production.
75
slaves, while the slave owners in Beta have slaves to use but no
animals. All other productive factors are equal in the two econo-
mies, i.e., both have the same natural resources, the same hand
tools, and the same type of slaves (i.e., the slaves in the two cases
have equal strength and skill); and, in addition, the slaves who are
household stewards and supervise the work of other slaves are
equally diligent and efficient.
In which of the two economies is more total annual wealth
likely to be produced––Alpha with beasts of burden, or Beta with-
out them? The answer is Alpha, of course.
Since the reason for this answer is that Alpha involves a pro-
ductive factor (animal power) not involved in Beta, it is perfectly
clear that one economy can be more productive than another
without that greater production of wealth resulting from the
greater productiveness of its human labor. And if that is clear, is it
not equally clear, according to the principle of justice stated, that
the distributive share to which labor would be justly entitled does
not necessarily increase with every increase in the total productive-
ness of the economy?
Now, then, substitute machines for animals; and for slaves,
substitute men with property in their own labor power. With these
substitutions, let Alpha be an industrial economy and Beta a nonin-
dustrial one. All other factors being equal, Alpha will annually pro-
duce more wealth than Beta; but the contribution of labor, as com-
pared with all other forms of property, will be no greater in Alpha
than in Beta.
The same relationships will hold if Alpha is an advanced indus-
trial society with powerful and automatic machinery, and Beta is a
relatively primitive industrial economy, with few machines and
poor ones.
Hence we see that the greater productiveness of one economy
as compared with another can be attributed to labor only if, all
other productive factors being equal, one economy employs more
76
man power than another, or if, with equal amounts of man power
employed, there is some difference in its average skill or strength.
Where it cannot be attributed to mechanical labor, and where,
in fact, such labor power makes a relatively diminishing contribu-
tion as compared with all capital instruments of production, men
who participate in production only through the use of such labor
power may be justly entitled to so small a share of the total wealth
produced, and would receive on a competitive evaluation of their
contribution so small a share, that it may become necessary for
them to use the power of labor unions, supported by the counter-
vailing power of government, in order to obtain a reasonable sub-
sistence or, better, a decent standard of living.
Laboring men may thus get what they need, even if it is more
than they have justly earned by their contribution to the produc-
tion of the society’s total wealth. And if they do get more than they
have justly earned, the distributive share paid out to the owners of
capital must necessarily be less than the productive use of their
property has justly earned for them. When this occurs, the rights of
private property in capital instruments have been invaded and
eroded, just as much as the rights of private property in labor
power are invaded and eroded whenever the owners of such pro-
ductive property are forced to take less than a competitively deter-
mined wage.
We are, therefore, confronted with this critical problem. In an
industrial economy such as ours, is it possible to order things so
that (1) all families are in a position to earn what amounts to a de-
cent standard of living, (2) by an organization of the economy
which preserves and respects the rights of private property in capi-
tal instruments as well as in labor power, and which (3) distributes
the wealth produced among those who contribute to its production
in accordance with the principle of distributive justice stated
above?
We know that Soviet Russia claims or hopes eventually to be
able to give all its families a decent standard of living. But we also
know that its economy is based on the abolition of private prop-
77
erty in capital instruments, and that it violates the principle of dis-
tributive justice insofar as it gives to each according to his needs,
not according to his deserts. State ownership of all capital instru-
ments and the governmental distribution of wealth in a charitable
fashion may be able to achieve human welfare so far as the general
standard of living is concerned, but such concentration of eco-
nomic and political power in the hands of the officials who man-
age and operate the machinery of the State cannot help infringing,
thwarting, or destroying the freedom of all the rest.
We know that in the United States we have already accom-
plished what Soviet Russia eventually hopes it can do to provide a
generally high standard of living. But we also know that the distri-
bution of wealth in this country has largely been effected by the
power of labor unions supported by the countervailing power of
government, by redistributive taxation, and by government spend-
ing to promote full employment. While more than 90 percent of
the wealth is produced by capital instruments, about 70 percent of
the resulting income is distributed to labor. Hence while private
property in capital instruments still exists nominally, property
rights are attenuated or eroded by withholding from the owners of
capital the share of the wealth produced that is proportionate to
the contribution their property makes.
The economy of the United States, or what some of its enthu-
siastic exponents call our “welfare capitalism,” is hardly a system
based on property rights and distributive justice. We may have
succeeded in meeting requirement (1) of the three desiderata stated
on the preceding page, but only at the expense of sacrificing re-
quirements (2) and (3).
Can the problem be solved? We think it can be, in spite of the
fact that, in an advanced industrial economy, the contribution of
mechanical labor to the production of wealth has diminished to
the point where the return to which it is justly entitled and which
it could obtain in a freely competitive market might well fall below
mere subsistence, not to mention a decent standard of living.
78
With every future phase of technological progress, the dis-
crepancy between (a) the contribution of labor to the production
of wealth and (b) the income needed by workers to maintain a de-
sirable standard of living must necessarily widen. But with every
technological advance, the increasing productiveness of capital in-
struments also makes the solution of the problem more feasible.
That solution is based on full respect for property rights and
on principles of economic justice which not only respect such
property rights but also recognize that each man (or, more accu-
rately, each household) has a natural human right to participate in
the production of wealth through the ownership and application
of productive property (either property in labor or in capital in-
struments or in both) to a degree sufficient to earn for that house-
hold a decent standard of living.
So far we have stated only one of the three principles of justice
that constitute the solution of the problem. By itself, it is inade-
quate, as will be seen when we show why it needs to be supple-
mented by the other two.30
30 An industrial economy faces another problem, which is neither one of justice
nor of charity in the distribution of wealth. It is the problem of maintaining a
level of consumption adequate to ever increasing levels of productiveness. If it
fails to solve this problem, an industrial economy is prone to cycles of boom-
and-bust in a mounting series of economic crises of the sort that Karl Marx pre-
dicted would bring about the eventual and inevitable collapse of capitalism. His
prediction that capitalism will sow the seeds of its own destruction is based, of
course, on his assumption that what he called the “capitalistic exploitation of
labor” would persist in keeping wages at a bare subsistence level. Since the few
who were capitalists could consume only a small portion of the goods an indus-
trial society was able to produce; and since the laboring masses kept at a bare
subsistence level did not have enough purchasing power to consume the residue,
Marx argued that mounting crises of overproduction and underconsumption are
inevitable. Only the widely diffused purchasing power that represents a generally
higher standard of living can solve this problem. No plan for the organization of
an industrial economy, no matter how just, has any practical significance unless
it also solves this problem of the economy’s self-preservation. Granting that, we
are confronted with these alternatives: (1) Can an industrial economy be saved
from self-destruction by adopting principles of economic justice, with full re-
spect for all human rights, including those of private property in capital as well
79
THE THREE RELEVANT PRINCIPLES OF JUSTICE
Justice, in its most general formulation, imposes the following
moral duties or precepts upon men who are associated for the pur-
poses of a common life: (1) to act for the common good of all, not
each for his own private interest exclusively; (2) to avoid injuring
one another; (3) to render to each man what is rightfully his due;
and (4) to deal fairly with one another in the exchange of goods
and in the distribution of wealth, position, status, rewards and pun-
ishments.
The one principle of justice already stated in this chapter is a
special application of the fourth precept to the distribution of
shares in the wealth produced among those who have participated
in its production. When, according to this principle, the distributive
share rightfully due a participant in production is determined, the
third precept becomes applicable, for it commands us to render
unto a man whatever is his due.
As we pointed out, two more principles are needed to solve the
problem stated in the preceding section. The second principle is a
special application of the third precept alone for, quite apart from
particular exchanges or distributions, it is concerned with the eco-
nomic rights of individuals and with the obligation of society to see
that every family gets its due in accordance with such rights. The
third principle calls for whatever legislative regulation of economic
activity may be needed to prevent some individuals from injuring
others by pursuing their private interests in a way that violates the
as in labor? Or (2) must it resort to principles of charity and welfare in order to
effect a generally higher standard of living, and in doing so violate certain princi-
ples of justice by invading the rights of private property in capital (as in the
United States) or by abolishing them entirely (as in Soviet Russia)? We think that
the first alternative is not only possible, but that it is also morally and humanly
better than the second, because by a just organization of the economy it pre-
serves political liberty and gives men individual freedom as well as the economic
welfare that is necessary, though not sufficient, for a good life. But it will take
the capitalistic revolution we are advocating to bring this about.
80
economic rights of others. It is a special application of the second
precept of justice given above, and indirectly of the first as well.
As applicable to the production and distribution of wealth,
these three principles of justice can be briefly stated in the follow-
ing manner:
1. THE PRINCIPLE OF DISTRIBUTION
Among those who participate in the production of wealth, each
should receive a share that is proportionate to the value of the
contribution each has made to the production of that wealth.
(It will be seen that this is another way of saying that each par-
ticipant in production is rightfully entitled to receive the wealth
he produces. Where all exchanges, including those which are
part of the process of production and distribution itself, are im-
partially evaluated through free competition, the share received
by each participant, paid in money, is the equivalent in value of
the contribution he has made.)
2. THE PRINCIPLE OF PARTICIPATION
Every man has a natural right to life, in consequence whereof he
has the right to maintain and preserve his life by all rightful
means, including the right to obtain his subsistence by produc-
ing wealth or by participating in the production of it.
(It will be seen that this is another way of saying that everyone
has a right to earn a living by participating in the production of
wealth. Since a man who is not a slave can participate in the
production of wealth only through the use of his own produc-
tive property, i.e., his own labor power or capital, the right to
earn a living is a right to property in the means of production.
The principle of participation, therefore, says that every man or,
more exactly, every household or consumer unit must own
property in the means of production capable, if employed with
reasonable diligence, of earning by its contribution to the pro-
81
duction of wealth a distributive share that is equivalent to a vi-
able income.)
3. THE PRINCIPLE OF LIMITATION
Since everyone has a right to property in the means of produc-
tion sufficient for earning a living, no one has a right to so ex-
tensive an ownership of the means of production that it ex-
cludes others from the opportunity to participate in production
to an extent capable of earning for themselves a viable income;
and, consequently, the ownership of productive property by an
individual or household must not be allowed to increase to the
point where it can injure others by excluding them from the op-
portunity to earn a viable income.
(It will be seen that this is another way of saying, first, that chat-
tel slavery is unjust, for it makes men propertyless and thus de-
prives them of their natural right to earn a living by their owner-
ship of any means of production; and, second, that, in an econ-
omy in which the private ownership of capital as well as labor is
the basis of an effective participation in the production of
wealth, injustice is done when the ownership of capital is so
highly concentrated in the hands of some men or households
that others are excluded from even that minimum degree of par-
ticipation in production which would enable them justly to earn
a viable income for themselves.)
If the meaning of these three principles is clear; if the relation
of the second to the first and of the third to the second is also
clear; if their special significance for an industrial as opposed to a
nonindustrial economy is seen; and if it is understood how the op-
eration of these three principles would solve the problem stated in
the preceding section, the reader does not need the amplification
which follows in the remainder of this chapter. It is offered to pro-
vide a commentary that may be needed. It sets forth, in the light of
82
the foregoing principles, the conditions requisite for the just or-
ganization of any economy, and especially of a capitalist economy.
THE ORGANIZATION OF A JUST ECONOMY
To show how the first principle is supplemented by the second,
and the second by the third, we will discuss the three principles in
the order named.
(1) The Principle of Distribution. While the fourth precept in the
general formulation of justice is almost exclusively concerned with
economic transactions so far as exchanges are concerned, it has
both political and economic application with regard to distribu-
tions.
Exchangeable goods are largely economic goods––
commodities and services which have exchange value. Here the
rule of justice is the simple rule of equality: that in the exchange of
heterogeneous goods, the things exchanged should be of equiva-
lent value. On the other hand, as the fourth precept indicates,
wealth is not the only thing that is subject to distribution among
men.
Political status and position can be justly or unjustly distrib-
uted. The rule of justice here is that equals should be treated
equally, and unequals unequally in proportion to their inequality.
The application of this rule depends on the ascertainment of the
facts of equality and inequality.
The fact that men are by nature equal makes the democratic
distribution of citizenship––universal and equal suffrage––just.31
31 The assertion that all men are by nature equal means that all are alike in their
natural possession of the dignity of being human and, as persons, of having the
natural endowments of reason and freedom which confer on all the capacity for
active participation in political life.
83
From this fact it also follows that all oligarchical restrictions of citi-
zenship and suffrage are unjust for, in restricting this fundamental
political status, to which all men are entitled, oligarchies treat
equals unequally.
The other fact, that men are individually different and unequal
in their innate talents and acquired virtues, calls for an unequal dis-
tribution of political offices or functions. Some men by their indi-
vidual merits are better qualified than others to perform the special
functions of government above the basic plane of political partici-
pation on which all men are equally entitled to operate as citizens.
To the extent that a democracy selects men for its hierarchy of
public offices or functions according to their merit, it distributes
these posts justly; for it thereby treats unequals unequally and pro-
portionately, placing men of greater ability in positions of greater
responsibility. What we have called a “rotating aristocracy of lead-
ers” is as essential to the political justice of a democracy as is the
institution of equal suffrage for all men.
The foregoing brief statement of the principle of distributive
justice, as applied to the basic political status of citizenship and the
hierarchy of public offices, prepares us for the statement of an
analogous application of the principle to the distribution of wealth
among the households of a community.
Considering only those who are engaged in the production of
wealth, and relying on free and workable competition as the only
way to ascertain the facts about the equal or unequal value of the
contributions made by each of a number of independent partici-
pants in production, distributive justice is done if the share
(whether in the form of wages, dividends, rents, etc.) received by
each participant in production is proportionate to the value of his
contribution to production.
Concretely stated, this means that if A, B, C and D are four
persons or families in a society having only four independent par-
ticipants in the production of wealth; and if, through the use of the
productive property they own, A, B and C contribute to the total
84
wealth produced in the ratio 3, 2, 1, then the distributive shares
they should receive, according to their just deserts, should also be
in the ratio of 3, 2, 1. And if the contribution of D, the fourth
member, is equal to that of A, B or C, his distributive share should
in justice be equal to that of A, B or C.
We can now explain why this principle is by itself inadequate to
solve our problem or to set up a just economy.
As stated, the principle does not take account of every man’s
natural economic right to share in the distribution of wealth as a
result of participating in its production. It looks only at the actual
facts of participation without questioning whether the existing state
of affairs is just in other respects, i.e., whether it provides every
household with the opportunity to participate in production to an
extent capable of earning thereby a viable income.
Thus, for example, the principle of distributive justice might be
operative in a pre-industrial slave economy even though that econ-
omy were unjust in other respects. It would be unjust insofar as it
deprived the men whom it enslaved of their natural right to earn a
living and, consequently, of their right to life itself. It would also be
unjust insofar as the concentrated ownership of labor power by a
small class of slave owners prevented other men who were not
slaves from earning by their own labor a viable income for them-
selves or families. Nevertheless, under such unjust conditions, dis-
tributive justice would still be done if the slave owners, who were
also the major landowners and owners of hand tools and beasts of
burden, received the major share of the wealth produced because
the major portion of that wealth had been produced by their prop-
erty, i.e., the means of production (land, tools, labor, etc.) which
they owned.
Before we turn to the second and third principles of justice––
the principles of participation and limitation––it is necessary to re-
mind the reader of something said at the end of Chapter Four;
namely, that these three principles of justice apply only to primary
distribution, and not at all to secondary distributions, for it is only
the primary distribution of wealth that directly results from partici-
85
pation in its production. It is also necessary to deal with a problem
which may have arisen in the reader’s mind with respect to the
principle of distribution that we have been considering. Facing this
problem here may not only prevent certain misunderstandings of
that principle, but may also contribute to the understanding of the
other two principles which are still to be discussed.
The problem to be faced arises from the consideration of those
aspects of human society which contribute to the production of
wealth where such contributions are not paid for. The most obvi-
ous of these things, especially from the point of view of an indus-
trial society, is accumulated scientific knowledge together with the
dissemination of it through the educational system. But other
things can also be mentioned, such as good public roads, an effi-
cient postal system, adequate care of public health, and other ser-
vices of government which protect or facilitate productive a ctivity.
If certain factors enter into the production of wealth for which
no one is paid because these factors do not represent private prop-
erty for the productive use of which anyone can justly claim a re-
turn out of the primary distribution of the wealth produced, then
how can it be said that each participant in production receives a
distributive share that is proportionate to the competitively deter-
mined value of his contribution? Is there not a leak here?
If in the primary distribution of the total wealth produced, that
total is divided among those alone who, by their labor or capital,
have participated in its production, do they not inevitably receive
some portion of the wealth that unpaid-for factors have contrib-
uted to producing? And do not these unpaid-for contributions es-
pecially benefit the owners of capital instruments which embody
scientific discoveries or inventions that have not been protected by
copyrights or patents or upon which the statutory copyright or
patent protection has lapsed? Does not the income they receive for
the contribution made to production by such capital instruments
contain and conceal an “unearned increment”––a payment to them
for something they did not contribute? If it does, then there is
something wrong or inadequate in our principle of distributive jus-
86
tice which asserts that the distributive shares should in every case
be proportioned to the value of the contribution made by those
who actually participate in production through their ownership of
currently active productive property, whether capital or labor or
currently furnished raw materials.
We contend that the principle of distributive justice as stated is
neither wrong nor inadequate. To begin with, this can be clearly
shown with regard to the contribution that scientific discoveries
and inventions make to the inherent productiveness of a techno-
logically advanced industrial society. What can be said on that score
applies to all the other unpaid-for factors that have been men-
tioned as grounds for questioning the justice of the distributive
principle which should be operative in the primary distribution of
wealth in a free society.
It is true that the construction and use of capital instruments
and related techniques of production do involve the appropriation,
from mankind’s funded knowledge, of ideas without which we
would still be obtaining our subsistence in the most primitive man-
ner. It should be noted, in the first place, that the ideas thus ap-
propriated come from knowledge that is the achievement of the
human race as a whole, not just our own society; and noted, in the
second place, that even where some specific new discovery or in-
vention has been recently made within our own society, and is then
technologically applied to the production of wealth, that recent
discovery or invention invariably involves the appropriation and
use of innumerable “old ideas” or elements of applicable knowl-
edge that have been in mankind’s possession for centuries, e.g., the
wheel.
The present inventor of an electronic control instrument which
would eliminate the human control of some widely used produc-
tive machinery may contribute something quite novel. It may even
be patentable under existing patent laws which, if the inventor
takes advantage of them, would give him for a limited length of
time a right (i.e., a property right) to charge a royalty for the use of
his invention; after which time, the idea becomes “public domain”
87
and can be appropriated by anyone without payment of royalty to
the inventor or his heirs. But this new invention, even if it is capa-
ble of being patented, depends of necessity upon the contributions
of thousands of scientists, mathematicians, discoverers and inven-
tors in the past.
Readily granting the importance and propriety of laws that en-
courage inventors by enabling them to obtain, for a limited time, a
property right in their contribution to production, there can be no
question that all the technologically applicable knowledge that lies
back of inventions, which can be protected by patent laws, prop-
erly belongs, upon the expiration of statutory patent rights and
copyrights, in the public domain. It is the common inheritance of
all men simply because they are men; and precisely because it is common,
all have an equal right to use it just as all have an equal opportunity to add to
it.
The equal right of every man to appropriate and use knowledge
that belongs to all men in common certainly does not entitle those
who make no use of such knowledge to share equally in the wealth
produced by those who take advantage of their right to use it by
putting it to work in a productive instrument or process. Yet that is
the only distributive effect which could follow from supposing
that, since the knowledge is the common possession of all, all
should stand to profit equally from its use.
To recognize that injustice would be done by thus treating
equally those who, with respect to knowledge in the public domain,
have not made an equal effort to use it productively is to see that
the principle of distributive justice, as stated, is neither wrong nor
inadequate, even when we take into account the contribution to
production that is made by the technologically applicable knowl-
edge that is the common possession of mankind.
The equality of men with regard to useful knowledge is an
equal right to the opportunity to master it, use it, and take advan-
tage of it. Men who use the common knowledge that spoiled food
may be poisonous do not share the illness of those who remain
88
ignorant or fail to apply such knowledge. It is said that one of the
great technological feats of mankind was the domestication of
animals. Once that was achieved, did the men who had the oppor-
tunity to take advantage of it, but did nothing about it, have a just
claim for sharing equally with those who captured and domesti-
cated animals for use as instruments of production?
Society and the State may well have a duty to all men to afford
them an equal opportunity to make use of the funded common
knowledge of mankind. A system of universal, free public school-
ing goes a long way toward creating such equal opportunity for all.
The existence of free public libraries is another step in the same
direction. But Society and the State cannot have a moral responsi-
bility to see that those who take advantage of such opportunities to
acquire knowledge which they then subsequently put to use in the
production of wealth should share in the proceeds of production
on an equal basis with those who, having the same opportunities,
make no use of them. That would not be justice but rank injustice.
The production of wealth is a current activity for a current re-
sult. If a man produces something by his labor and sells the prod-
uct in a free market, he has currently received the return for his
efforts and has no further claim on any return from the use that is
later made of the thing he has sold. If, subsequently, the purchaser
makes a productive use of it, then it is the purchaser of the thing,
not the original producer of it, to whom the current return must be
made.32 He acquired property rights in it, and so long as these are
vested in him, he has sole right to claim a distributive return for
contributions to production made by the employment of his pro-
ductive property, even as, at an earlier moment, the original pro-
ducer of the thing in question had sole right to claim a distributive
return for the use of his labor power in producing it.
32 Of course, specific contractual arrangements, such as provisions for royalty
payments on tools embodying patented inventions, may be the basis of a duty of
an otherwise outright owner to pay for using his property in production.
89
Hence those who take advantage of the common knowledge of
mankind and use it in the production of wealth by capital instru-
ments that incorporate such knowledge, as well as those who ac-
quire by legal means property rights in capital instruments of this
sort, have no obligation whatsoever to share their current returns
from the economic productivity of their capital property even with
those who made the discoveries therein incorporated (assuming
they could be identified), except to the extent provided by patent
laws or by specific contractual arrangements between those who
made the discoveries or inventions and others who wish to make
use of them.
There is even less of an obligation on the part of those who
own capital instruments that incorporate elements from the funded
common knowledge of mankind (which all capital instruments do)
to share with all members of society all or even some portion of
the wealth produced by these instruments. Justice is done if the
benefit that each participant in production derives from the funded
common knowledge of mankind depends on the specific use he
makes of that knowledge in the current production of wealth.
Those who currently contribute to the fund of man’s technologi-
cally applicable knowledge can derive a current benefit from their
contribution to whatever extent they can take advantage of the ex-
isting patent laws or enter into special contracts of advantage to
themselves.
What has been said on the subject of useful knowledge holds
for other aspects of man’s social life which contribute to the pro-
duction of wealth, but which are in the public domain and which,
therefore, all men are equally entitled to use to their advantage.
Those who do are then entitled to derive a benefit corresponding
to the productive use they have made of the factor in question. But
in the case of the economically useful services of government an-
other consideration enters. Such services, e.g., road building and
maintenance, postal service, etc., which promote the production of
wealth, are among the functions of government the costs of which
are paid for by taxation.
90
Under an equitable system of taxation, all members of society
contribute to defray the costs of government. All are equally enti-
tled to take advantage of those services performed by government
which are helpful to anyone engaged in producing wealth. Hence,
here as before, there is no ground for maintaining that those who
make use of this right are not entitled to the benefit derived from
the use they have made. To think otherwise is either (a) to assert
that all who pay taxes should share equally in the economic bene-
fits derived from the services of government, regardless of whether
they take advantage of them in the production of wealth, or (b) to
admit that the availability of such useful services in the production
of wealth can have no definite effect on its distribution.
(2) The Principle of Participation. In the fourfold formulation of
the general meaning of justice with which we began, the third pre-
cept called for rendering to each man what is his due by right.
When it is declared that life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness
are among man’s natural and inalienable rights, criteria are laid
down by which to measure the justice of the political and eco-
nomic institutions of a society.
A just society is one which, by its constitutions, laws, and ar-
rangements, recognizes and protects all of man’s natural rights; and
to the extent that society violates one or more of these, it is unjust
in its organization. Some of these rights belong to man as a human
being, e.g., the rights of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness;
some belong to man as a civic person or member of the political
community, e.g., the right to suffrage, the right of association, the
right to form political parties; and some belong to man as an eco-
nomic person or member of the economy, e.g., the rights of man as
an owner of property and as a producer or consumer of wealth.33
We are here concerned with man’s economic rights. Among
these, two are of paramount importance for the just organization
of an economy.
33 For an enumeration and classification of natural rights, see Jacques Maritain,
The Rights of Man and Natural Law, New York, 1951: Ch. II, esp. pp. 73-114.
91
One is man’s right to property in his own labor power. As we
have seen, the injustice of chattel slavery or forced labor consists in
the violation of this right. But while an economy which has abol-
ished chattel slavery or forced labor grants all men the right to be
independent participants in the production of wealth through the
use of their own labor power, that by itself is not enough in any
economy in which men who wish to earn a living by the use of their
property are unable to do so.
We are thus brought to the consideration of a second basic
right, which is complementary to man’s right to produce the wealth
he needs, or, what is the same thing, to share in the distribution of
wealth as a result of earning his share.
This second right derives immediately from the most funda-
mental among all of man’s natural rights––his right to life or exis-
tence. The right to life involves more than a right not to be mur-
dered or maimed. Since a man cannot live for long without having
the means of subsistence, the right to life is meaningless unless it
involves a right to acquire subsistence by rightful means.
This right has sometimes been referred to as the “right to a liv-
ing wage.”34 As that phrase indicates, it is a right to earn a living,
not to receive it as a gift or to obtain it by theft. To say that it is a
right to earned income is, therefore, to say that the share of wealth
received must be proportioned to the contribution made.
The chattel slave may be given subsistence; but since he is de-
prived of all property––property in his life and liberty as well as
labor power––he has, under these unjust conditions, no way of
earning his living. A man who cannot find employment may be
kept alive by private charity or by the public dole; but he, too, is
unable to earn a living so long as he is unable to use the only prop-
erty he has, his labor power, to participate in the production of
wealth and thereby have a just claim upon a share in its distribu-
tion.
34 See Msgr. John A. Ryan, A Living Wage: Its Ethical and Economic Aspects, New
York, 1906.
92
Thus we see that there are two conditions under which a man’s
life may be preserved and yet his right to subsistence denied, i.e.,
his right to obtain a living through the use of his own property.
One is the condition of slavery, in which a man lacks any property
through which he can participate in the production of wealth. The
other is the condition of those who have productive property but
whose property, under the prevailing economic circumstances, is
rendered ineffective as a means of obtaining a viable income.
We are, therefore, required by justice to do more than abolish
chattel slavery. We are required to organize the economy in such a
way that every man or family can use his or its property to partici-
pate in the production of wealth in a way that earns a living for that
man or family.
This principle of justice, which is based on the right of every
man or family to obtain a viable income by earning it, is integrally
connected with the principle of distributive justice already stated.
The latter declares the right of every independent participant in the
production of wealth to receive a share of that wealth proportion-
ate to his contribution. It indicates that a man’s right to an earned
income is a conditional right; for it imposes upon him the duty to
contribute by the use of his property to the production of wealth.
Unless he does so, he cannot rightfully claim a share.
Unless a man exercises his right to earn a living by actual par-
ticipation in production, he is not entitled to any distributive share.
But the right to earn a living by participating in the production of
wealth would be a wholly illusory right if the only means by which
it could be exercised were in fact incapable of producing wealth or
of making a large enough contribution toward its production to
earn a viable distributive share. Hence the principle of distributive
justice does not operate to guarantee the right to earn a living un-
less the economy is so organized that every man or family has or
can readily obtain property which can be effectively used to par-
ticipate in the production of wealth to an extent that justifies the
93
claim to a share which constitutes a viable income for that man or
family.35
When, relative to the increasing productive power of capital in-
struments, labor as a whole makes a progressively diminishing con-
tribution to the production of wealth, the full employment of those
whose only property is such labor power, even if that is accompa-
nied by a just distribution to them of what they earn through the
contribution they make, would not provide such men and their
families with a viable income.
Hence in an industrial economy, and especially in one that is
technologically advanced, the right to obtain subsistence by earning
it involves more than the right to work and the right to a just re-
turn for work done. It involves the right to participate effectively in
the production of wealth by means consistent with the existing
state of technology and with the greatest technological advances of
which the economy is capable.
As labor becomes less and less productive of wealth, the own-
ership of nothing but labor power becomes less and less adequate
to satisfy the principle of participation, on condition, of course,
that the share of wealth labor receives is equivalent to the value of
its contribution as competitively determined. When, for example,
35 In any society, there cannot help being marginal cases of economic failure or
economic incompetence. After justice has been done, private or public charity
always remains as the remedy for those who are in dire need through no moral
fault of their own. In the organization of the economy, justice takes precedence
over charity. Only after every step has been taken to see that justice is done, and
only after every rightful claim is requited, should charity become operative in
response to those pressing human needs which even the most just organization
of the production and distribution of wealth may fail to provide for. On this
point, see W. Stark’s essay The Contained Economy (Blackfriars Publications, Lon-
don, 1956: Aquinas Paper No. 26). Stark points out that “however desirable a
spirit of charity may be in social life, society can yet survive without it. But jus-
tice is not just an embellishment of human co -existence, it is the very basis of it,
an indispensable precondition.” Declaring that “a sin against justice is an attack
on the social bond itself,” Stark maintains that “a sin against justice is a very
much more serious affair than a sin against charity” (op. cit., p. 18).
94
the state of automated production reaches a point where, at current
levels of consumer demand (free from artificial stimulants designed
to create “full employment”), the demand for labor is substantially
less than the number of those whose only means of participating in
production is through their labor, then for a large number of men
the mere ownership of labor power may give them insufficient in-
come-earning property to satisfy the second principle of justice.
When the great bulk of the wealth is produced by capital instruments, the prin-
ciple of participation requires that a large number of households participate in
production through the ownership of such instruments.
To assert that every man has a right to obtain his living by
earning it is not, therefore, the same as asserting everyone’s right to
a living wage. Under pre-industrial conditions, it might have been
possible for those who had no property except their own labor
power to have earned a living wage if their contribution to the
production of wealth had been justly requited. But in an advanced
industrial economy, in which most of the wealth is produced by
capital and in which the ownership of capital is concentrated so
that all but a few households are entirely dependent upon their
ownership of labor for participation in production, it is apparent
that labor––at least mechanical labor––would not earn a living
wage if the contribution it makes, relative to that made by capital
instruments, were justly requited; that is, if instead of being over-
paid, the value of its services were objectively and impartially
evaluated under conditions of free competition.
To contend that, under all conditions, men are justly entitled to
a living wage is, therefore, equivalent to saying that men have a
right to the continuance of the conditions under which wealth is
produced primarily by labor. There is, of course, no such right; nor
would men wish to see it implemented or enforced if there were.
To speak of the right to a living wage is, therefore, an inaccurate
statement of the right to earn a viable income by effective partici-
pation in the production of wealth. The principle of participation
entails a right to produce wealth in a manner consistent with the
95
way wealth is in fact being produced, taking full advantage of the
existing state of technology.
In an industrial economy, there are two basic ways in which a
man or a household may participate in the production of wealth to
an extent sufficient to earn thereby a viable income. One is
through the productive employment of one’s own labor power.
The other is through the productive employment of the capital in-
struments in which one has property (normally represented by
shares of capital stock, but capable of being represented by other
forms of securities or by partnerships or other proprietary inter-
ests). A household may also participate in production through
combinations of these two means.
In all three cases, the income is earned income, for it is earned
by the productive use of one’s private property, whether that is
property in capital instruments or property in labor power.
The right to earn a viable income is thus seen as the right of
every man or family to own property which, under the prevailing
system of producing wealth, is capable of enabling its owner to
contribute to the production of wealth to an extent that justly enti-
tles him to receive in return an earned income to support a decent
standard of living.
(3) The Principle of Limitation. This third principle is implied by
the first and second, i.e., the principles of distribution and partici-
pation.
Capital instruments are productive of wealth in exactly the
same sense that labor power is productive of wealth. In the ab-
sence of chattel slavery, the ownership of labor cannot be concen-
trated; on the contrary, it is completely diffused, each free man
having proprietorship in his own labor. But it is possible for the
ownership of capital to become highly concentrated. Such concen-
tration is capable of reaching the point at which some men or
households are either totally excluded from participation in pro-
duction or excluded from participating to an extent sufficient to
earn them a viable income or, as we sometimes say, a decent stan-
96
dard of living. It is at this point that the principle of limitation must
become operative to prevent such concentrations of capital owner-
ship as are injurious to the economic rights of others, i.e., their
right of effective participation in production and to earn thereby a
viable income in the form of the distributive share to which they
are justly entitled by the value of their contribution.
This principle of limitation has significance only for an econ-
omy based on the institution of private property in the means of
production and on the joint participation of a number of inde-
pendent contributors to the production of wealth. If the size of the
distributive share an individual receives bears no relation to the
value of the contribution he makes; if, in other words, the principle
of distribution is “from each according to his ability, and to each
according to his needs,” then the principle of limitation is without
significance. On the contrary, if the distribution of wealth is based
on a principle of charity divorced from property rights, instead of
on a principle of justice in acknowledgment of property rights,
then the distribution of wealth may be more effectively accom-
plished through the greatest possible concentration of capital own-
ership, e.g., its total ownership by the State.
As the methods by which an economy produces its wealth call
for proportionately more capital and less labor, the opportunities
to participate in the production of wealth increasingly rest on indi-
vidual ownership of capital and decreasingly on individual owner-
ship of labor. The concentration of capital ownership––a wholly
normal process where the inherent productiveness of one factor is
constantly increasing in relation to that of the other––will tend at
some point to become a monopolization of the principal means of
production by some members of the economy. When this hap-
pens, others will be excluded from opportunities to which they
have a natural right.
To whatever extent the concentrated ownership of a society’s
capital stock excludes any portion of its members from effective
participation in the production of wealth (i.e., effective in the sense
of earning a viable income through the productive employment of
97
their own property), such concentrated ownership is intrinsically
unjust. It not only violates the common good but also does direct
injury to those individuals who are deprived of their natural right
to earn a viable income under a system of production in which it is
impossible for them to earn a living wage by forms of labor whose
contribution, competitively evaluated, would not justly entitle them
to a decent standard of living for themselves or their families.
Accordingly, the concentration of ownership in the hands of
some men or families must not be allowed to go beyond the point
where, under a just system of distribution, it would prevent other
men or families from earning a viable income by participating ef-
fectively in production. When the preponderant portion of the
wealth is produced by capital, participation in the production of
wealth must be preponderantly through the ownership of capital––
a requirement which at some point, to be empirically determined,
imposes a limit upon concentration in the ownership of capital.36
It is not our purpose here to anticipate the legislative delibera-
tions which must precede the determination of the point at which,
under given technological conditions and for any given general
standard of living, the concentrated ownership of capital becomes
destructive of the opportunities of others to participate effectively
in the production of wealth. In the second part of this book, de-
voted to outlining a practical program for accomplishing the capi-
talist revolution, we will suggest what we believe to be a number of
feasible ways of making the principle of limitation operative.37 Suf-
fice it to say here that the principles of distribution and participation cannot
be observed in the absence of laws designed to make the principle of limitation
effective.
The liberty of each man to pursue his private interests, so far as
this can be done without injury to others or to the common good,
would not be infringed by legislation preventing individual accu-
36 It should be noted that the principle of limitation calls for no upper limit to
the private ownership of nonproductive property, i.e., consumer goods.
37 This is done in Chapter Thirteen.
98
mulations of capital from exceeding the amount at which they tend
to prevent others from effectively participating in the production
of wealth by their ownership of capital. If any line can be drawn
between liberty and license, it is certainly at the point at which one
individual seeks to do as he pleases even though he thereby invades
the rights and liberties of other men. In his essay On Liberty, John
Stuart Mill circumscribed the sphere of actions in which the indi-
vidual is justly entitled to be free from interference or regulation on
the part of society or government, by excluding from that sphere
actions which injure others or work against the public interest.38
In Mill’s terms, the principle of limitation we are here discuss-
ing calls for a justifiable limitation on individual liberty to acquire
wealth in the form of capital goods. It limits such liberty by a just
concern for the rights of others. It simply says, to paraphrase Mill,
that no man’s ownership of the most productive form of property
in an industrial economy should be so extensive as to exclude oth-
ers from an economically significant participation in the produc-
tion of wealth, or as to reduce their participation below that mini-
mum level where their competitively evaluated distributive share is
a viable income for themselves or their families.
In a democratic polity, political freedom and justice are as
widely diffused as citizenship. If one wishes freedom and justice,
the thing to be in a democracy is a citizen. As one cannot now ef-
38 “The object of this Essay,” he declared, “is to assert one very simple principle,
as entitled to govern absolutely the dealings of society with the individual in the
way of compulsion and control. . . . That principle is, that the sole end for which
mankind are warranted, individually or collectively, in interfering with the liberty
of action of any of their number, is self-protection. That the only purpose for
which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilized commu-
nity, against his will, is to prevent harm to others. . . . The only part of the co n-
duct of anyone, for which he is amenable to society, is that which concerns oth-
ers” (op. cit., Ch. 1). And in Chapter V he reiterated that “for such actions as are
prejudicial to the interests of others, the individual is accountable, and may be
subjected either to social or legal punishment, if society is of opinion that the
one or the other is requisite for its protection.”
99
fectively participate in democratic self-government without suf-
frage, so in the fully mature industrialism of the future it may be
impossible to participate effectively in the industrial production of
wealth without owning capital.
It should not come as a surprise, therefore, that in a truly capi-
talist economy, economic freedom and justice will be as widely dif-
fused as the ownership of capital. The thing to be in a capitalist
democracy is a citizen-capitalist.
100
6 ECONOMIC HISTORY:
THE CLASSIFICATION OF ECONOMIES
FIRST STAGE: FROM THE BEGINNING
TO THE NINETEENTH CENTURY
Until the emergence of industrial production in the nineteenth cen-
tury, all the economies of the past were laborist economies. Many
were in fact slave economies, because a large portion of the human
labor used to produce wealth was drawn from men who were
owned as chattels. But a laborist economy need not be a slave
economy. In fact, the primitive form of the laborist economy in-
volved no slaves at all. It was only in its civilized form that slavery
was introduced and became indispensable to the development of
civilization.
We define an economy as laborist if labor (i.e., human produc-
tive power and skill) is the chief force in the production of wealth,
and is either the sole form or the principal form of productive
101
property entitling its owners to shares in the distribution of the
wealth produced.
The primitive laborist economy was that of the isolated family
or the small village or tribe, in which there was some division of
labor among the members of the group, in which each family
owned its own labor power, its tools and its animals, in which land
was usually common rather than appropriated, and in which few
were hirelings, i.e., dependent for their subsistence on payments
made by others.
In some primitive laborist economies, including some that exist
today, the distribution of the total wealth produced was and is ac-
complished by gift and apportioned to need rather than deter-
mined by right and apportioned to earning. In such cases, the insti-
tutions of the market and competitive evaluation by demand were
and are also absent.39
However, where in a primitive laborist economy the distribu-
tion was by right rather than by gift (as, for example, in isolated
colonies or frontier settlements), that distribution was also laboristic
in form. It could hardly have been otherwise if it tended to ap-
proximate a just distribution; for in an economy where labor is the
chief productive force, the distributive shares of the wealth pro-
duced, to be justly apportioned, must be largely determined by the
different amounts of labor––both power and skill––whereby men
contribute to the production of wealth.
In certain primitive laborist economies––again the frontier set-
tlement affords a good example––the ownership of productive
property was widely diffused. Each man or family owned his or its
own labor power, tools, and animals. An almost universal diffusion
of this sort will not be achieved again until the capitalist revolution
is fully accomplished; for in most of the civilized forms of the la-
borist economy, certainly in all that were built on slave labor, there
was highly concentrated ownership of labor as the chief form of
productive property; as, in the first hundred and fifty years of the
39 On this point, see Karl Polanyi, The Great Transformation, New York, 1944: Ch.
4.
102
capitalist economy, there was and still is highly concentrated own-
ership of capital as the chief form of productive property.40
What has just been said calls attention to the critical difference
between the primitive and civilized forms of a laborist economy.
The latter form usually involves chattel slavery or feudal serfdom.
Hence it concentrates in the hands of the slave owners or feudal
lords the ownership or control of the chief form of productive
property, i.e., human labor or skill.
The civilized form of the laborist economy arose with the
emergence of cities and with a division of society into a leisure
class of free men and a working class of chattel slaves, mechanics,
and artisans. The slave owners, or feudal lords, were also the land-
owners and the owners of the tools, animals, raw materials, etc.
Hence the ownership of almost all productive property was con-
centrated in the hands of the few and with that, of course, went a
great concentration of political power. The leisure class was the
ruling class. The working masses were without political status,
rights, and liberties; and, except for bloody uprisings, such as the
Peasants’ Revolt at the time of the Reformation, they had no way
of exerting any political power.41
In the civilized form of the laborist economy, there was not
only a division of labor in the sphere of subsistence work, but,
what is more important, there was also a sharp division of human
activity itself into subsistence work and leisure work. While slaves
and toilers produced the wealth on which the whole society sub-
sisted and prospered, the propertied men of leisure, at least those
40 It reaches the absolute limit of concentration in Soviet Russia where the State
owns all capital instruments and so is the only capitalist. It was slightly less co n-
centrated in the “laissez-faire capitalism” of England and the United States in the
nineteenth century. It is still less concentrated in the “welfare capitalism” of
England and the United States today.
41 The “Bloodless Rebellion” in England in 1688 and the French Revolution a
century later were uprisings of the new merchant class against the feudal aristoc-
racy of king and court. The condition of the working masses remained un-
changed by this change in the character of their masters.
103
who were virtuous as well as free, produced the goods of civiliza-
tion. It was generally thought that slavery, serfdom, or their equiva-
lents in submerged human labor, were necessary for the emancipa-
tion of the few to do the work of civilization.
SECOND STAGE: FROM 1800 TO THE PRESENT DAY
We defined a laborist economy as one in which human labor is the
sole or chief productive force, entitling the owners of labor (their
own or that of chattel slaves) to shares in the distribution of the
wealth produced.
With the invention and improvement of power-driven ma-
chines, labor began to lose its place as the chief form of productive
property. As society passed from handicraft production to machine
production and from nonmechanized to mechanized agriculture
and mining, labor progressively contributed less and less to the
wealth produced; capital instruments, more and more. As the effi-
ciency of the machines increased, the burden of production gradu-
ally shifted from men to machines. With that change, capital re-
placed labor as the principal form of productive property.
When labor is the chief productive force in the economy, it
must be combined, of course, with other productive factors, such
as natural resources and hand tools. Similarly, when machines con-
stitute the chief productive force, they must also be combined with
other productive factors, such as natural resources and labor. The
main difference between a nonmechanized system of production
and an industrial system, therefore, lies in the substitution of ma-
chinery for labor as the principal form of productive property.
As we have already seen, capital consists of property in all the
means of producing wealth except one, i.e., labor. Hence, by the
substitution of machinery for labor as the principal form of pro-
ductive property, we pass from a laborist to a capitalist economy.
The distinctive character of a capitalist economy is thus indi-
cated. It can be defined as an economy in which capital instru-
104
ments are the chief productive force and, together with natural re-
sources, constitute the principal form of productive property enti-
tling its owners to shares in the distribution of the wealth pro-
duced.
THE CLASSIFICATION OF ECONOMIES
All economies are either economies in which labor is the chief
productive force and the principal form of productive property, or
they are economies in which capital rather than labor occupies that
place. The primary division among all economies is thus based on
mode of production. By this criterion, all economies are either la-
borist or capitalist.
Subordinately, economies which are either laborist or capitalist
in mode of production can be further divided by reference to
mode of ownership and form of distribution. We have already
made such subdivisions among the laborist economies of the past.
We have seen that the ownership of labor power was either (a)
universally diffused, as in primitive laborist economies in which
slavery did not exist, or (b) relatively concentrated, as in civilized
laborist economies in which large amounts of human labor were
owned by a small slave-owning class. We have also seen that the
form of distribution was either (a) by right, i.e., based on amount of
contribution to production, or (b) by gift, i.e., based on needs
rather than on rights.
In those cases in which all, or a major portion, of the wealth
produced is distributed among those who by their labor produced
it, we call the form of the distribution “laboristic.” The principle of
such distribution may be either justice or charity depending on
whether it is based on rights or needs. Labor receives what labor
earns when shares of the wealth produced are apportioned among
those who produce it by a competitive evaluation of the contribu-
tions workers make to its production.
105
The slave economies present us with what at first appears to be
an anomalous case. They were laborist in mode of production, but
they were not laboristic in mode of distribution, inasmuch as the
major portion of the wealth produced went to the slave owners
who were also owners of land, tools, and animals. If we can call the
slave owners “capitalists,” even though labor was the principal
form of productive property that they owned, we can describe the
form of distribution as “capitalistic,” thereby signifying that the
major portion of the wealth produced was distributed to those who
earned it, not by their own labor power but by the use of other in-
struments of production which they owned.
So far the terms we have used to describe the various forms of
the laborist economy are purely descriptive. They describe the way
in which the wealth of a society is produced, the way in which its
principal productive property is owned, and the way in which the
wealth produced is distributed. But when we pass from the form of distri-
bution to the principle of distribution, we cannot avoid questions of justice.
Thus, for example, we have seen that, in an economy that is labor-
ist as to mode of production, either justice or charity (i.e., either
rights or needs) may be the principle of a distribution that is labor-
istic in form.
We are also confronted with the anomalous case of the slave
economies that are laborist as to mode of production but are
“capitalistic” rather than “laboristic” in the form of their distribu-
tion. The basic fact that slavery is intrinsically unjust, because it
violates each man’s natural right to property in his own labor
power, underlies the anomalous character of the slave economies.
It explains how they can be capitalistic in form of distribution,
even though they are laborist as to mode of production. Wherever
we find such discrepancy between the mode of production and the
form of distribution, we have good reason to suspect that the
economy is not organized in accordance with all three of the rele-
106
vant principles of economic justice––the principles of distribution,
participation and limitation.42
Nevertheless, if we judge the slave economies in terms of only
one of these principles, i.e., the principle of apportioning distribu-
tive shares on the basis of contributive shares, then the capitalistic
form of distribution in a slave economy did observe one principle
of justice while violating the other two. This amounts to saying that
if we do not question the highly concentrated ownership of human
labor (which violated the principles of participation and limitation),
then slave owners, in receiving the major portion of the society’s
wealth, received what the productive use of their property earned
for them.
THE FORMS OF CAPITALISM
With these criteria of classification clear, we turn to economies that
are capitalist in mode of production, in order to classify them fur-
ther by reference to (1) mode of ownership, (2) form of distribu-
tion, and (3) principle of distribution. We will try to present a
purely descriptive classification first; but while a description of the
forms of capitalism can be separated from questions of justice and
liberty, the human significance of the forms described cannot be
judged except in the light of such questions.43
42 In fact, it can be stated as a general rule that the more closely the form of dis-
tribution matches the mode of production, the more nearly an economy ap-
proaches justice in distribution. A capitalistic form of distribution in a laborist
economy (e.g., ancient slave economies) is unjust; and similarly, a laboristic form
of distribution in a capitalist economy.
43 In what follows, the reader will be aided by remembering that we have
adopted the adjectives “laborist” and “capitalist” to designate an economy by
reference to its mode of production, and that we shall use the adjectives “labor-
istic” and “capitalistic” in designating an economy by reference to its form of
distribution.
107
What follows, then, is a classification of economies that are all
forms of capitalism in the basic descriptive sense of that term. In
our judgment, the primary division of economies should be made
by reference to mode of production rather than mode of owner-
ship or form of distribution. What we are about to describe as the
various forms of capitalism are all economies that are clearly capi-
talist rather than laborist in their mode of production.
(1) The Mode of Ownership. The capital instruments of a society
can be (a) privately owned and operated by individuals, families,
and corporations; or (b) publicly owned by the State and operated
by its governing bureaucracy.
(a) Under a system of private ownership of capital, the owner-
ship may be highly concentrated in the hands of the few at one ex-
treme, or widely diffused among the population at the other ex-
treme; or its degree of concentration or diffusion may fall some-
where between these two extremes. Insofar as it is highly concen-
trated, it gives the few economic power with which they can exert
undue influence on the organs and personnel of government. Inso-
far as it is widely diffused, it gives the people generally the eco-
nomic independence they need to bulwark their political liberty.
(b) Under the system of public ownership of capital, the own-
ership is completely concentrated in the corporate personality of
the State, which means that, for all practical purposes, it is highly
concentrated in the hands of the policy making office-holders who
exercise the political power of the State. Only if those persons were
completely responsible to the electorate and subject to all the
checks of popular sovereignty could the operative control of the
capital instruments owned by the State be widely diffused, even
though the ownership of them is not. But where, in a capitalist
economy, private persons and corporations do not own property in
capital instruments, they are without the leverage of economic
power to exercise control over those who have political power; and
so, where the State is the only capitalist, both economic and politi-
cal power tend to become concentrated in the organs or bureaus of
government. The bureaucrats who act in the name of the State are
108
beyond check and cannot be made responsible. Under such condi-
tions, democratic processes are fictitious, and the economic as well
as political freedom of individuals is all but extinguished.44
(2) The Form of Distribution. In economies in which capital in-
struments are the chief productive force and the principal form of
productive property, the form of distribution is either (a) capitalis-
tic or (b) laboristic. We are using these terms here in the same de-
scriptive sense that we used them before in connection with
economies in which human labor is the chief productive force and
the principal form of productive property.
(a) The distribution is capitalistic in form if the major portion
of the wealth produced goes to the owners of capital. In an econ-
omy in which the private ownership of capital prevails, and in
44 In his Economic Policy for a Free Society, Chicago, 1951, Henry C. Simons summa-
rizes the case for the diffused ownership of property as indispensable to both
political and economic freedom. “Private property in the instruments of produc-
tion,” he writes, “is an institutional device both for dispersing power and for
securing effective organization of production. The only simple property system
is that of a slave society with a single slave owner––which, significantly, is the
limiting case of despotism and of monopoly.” (He might have said the same of a
capitalist economy with a single owner of capital––the State.) “Departure from
such a system,” Simon continues, “is a fair measure of human progress. The
libertarian good society lies at an opposite extreme, in the maximum dispersion
of property compatible with effective production. . . . Basic to liberty are prop-
erty rights in labor or personal capacities. The abolitions of slavery and serfdom
are the great steps toward freedom––and, by the way, are striking reconciliations
of apparent conflict between productional and distributional considerations.
Property in one’s own services, however, is a secure, substantial right only where
there are many possible buyers. It thus implies private property in other re-
sources and freedom of independent sellers of labor to choose and to move
among autonomous, independent organizations or firms. It also implies a dis-
tinctively modern institutional achievement, namely, the separation or dissocia-
tion of the economic and the political––a political order that sustains formal
rights and a largely separate economic order that gives them substance.” Simon
then goes on to say that all property rights––both in capital and in labor––are
integral aspects of personal capacity, and that “a society based on free, responsi-
ble individuals or families must involve extensive rights of property,” presuma-
bly in capital instruments as well as in labor. See “A Political Credo” in op. cit.,
pp. 27-28.
109
which that ownership is highly concentrated in the hands of a small
class, the residue which remains to be apportioned among the la-
boring masses will inevitably be less than is needed for a decent
standard of living, or in some cases even for a meager subsis-
tence.45
(b) The distribution is laboristic in form if all or the major por-
tion of the wealth produced goes to those who contribute to its
production only by the use of their own labor power; and it is
partly laboristic and partly capitalistic in form if the distributive
share which goes to the owners of capital is less than the major
portion of the wealth produced, being the residue that remains af-
ter a substantial portion of that wealth goes to labor in order to
provide a majority of the population with a decent standard of liv-
ing.46
In an economy in which the ownership of capital is completely
concentrated in the hands of the State, the form of distribution is
purely laboristic, and necessarily so.47
In an economy in which capital is privately owned, but in
which that ownership is concentrated in the hands of the few, the
form of distribution cannot be purely laboristic without completely
violating the rights of private property in capital. A purely laboristic
distribution of industrially produced wealth is inconsistent with the
effective private ownership of capital. It nullifies a productive use
of such property in order to obtain the share of the wealth which it
produced. But under a system of private ownership, and one in
which that ownership is highly concentrated, it is possible for the
form of distribution to be either purely capitalistic or partly capital-
istic and partly laboristic.
45 British capitalism throughout the nineteenth century is the classic example of
a capitalistic economy in which the form of distribution was purely capitalistic.
46 British or American capitalism in the middle of the twentieth century is the
classic example of a capitalistic economy in which the form of distribution is
mixed, i.e., partly capitalistic and partly laboristic.
47 The capitalism of Soviet Russia is the classic example of a capitalistic economy
in which the form of distribution is purely laboristic.
110
We cannot describe the difference between these two alterna-
tives without considering the principles that control these two
forms of distribution––on one hand, the principle of justice to-
gether with respect for human rights; on the other hand, the prin-
ciple of charity together with concern for human needs.
(3) The Principle Underlying the Form of Distribution. The principle
underlying the form of distribution is either (a) one of strict justice,
based on the rights of private property in capital and labor, as well
as on other human rights; or (b) one of charity.
When the principle is one of charity, concern for human needs
or welfare may lead to only a limited invasion of the rights of pri-
vate property in capital, in which case the form of distribution will
remain partly capitalistic; or the principle of need may completely
replace the principle of rights, in which case private property in
capital will be completely abolished and the form of distribution
will become purely laboristic.
The capitalist economy of Soviet Russia represents one in
which a purely laboristic distribution is avowed to rest entirely on
the principle of human needs or welfare. The substitution of needs
for rights is of a piece with the abolition of private property in
capital. Both together express the view that since the State should
take possession of all capital instruments for the welfare of the
people, the wealth produced by capital should be distributed to
them according to their needs and not apportioned on the basis of
the varying contributions which individual men make by their la-
bor.48
48 According to Lenin’s interpretation of it, in State and Revolution, the Marxist
principle––“from each according to his ability, to each according to his needs”—
replaces and transcends all considerations of justice and rights. The communist
ideal, according to Lenin, will not be fully realized until such bourgeois consid-
erations are as completely abolished as the institution of private property in capi-
tal, with which they are connected. See op. cit., Moscow, 1949: Ch. V, Sects. 3
and 4.
111
We said above that the purely laboristic distribution in Soviet
Russia is avowed to rest entirely on the principle of human needs
or welfare. From recent reports, it would appear that actual prac-
tice deviates from Marxist theory, insofar as a much higher stan-
dard of living is accorded by the State to managerial and technical
labor than to mechanical labor. This might be thought to be an
atavistic revival of some concern for rights, in view of the fact that
in any capitalist economy managerial and technical labor contrib-
utes much more than mechanical labor to the production of soci-
ety’s wealth. But if the establishment by the State of wide differen-
tials in living standards springs solely from a wish to provide the
necessary incentives or inducements to get certain kinds of work
well done, then the controlling principle is neither one of justice
nor of charity, but of expediency. It aims at the survival of the
economy itself, or at its greater productivity and prosperity.49
The present capitalistic economy of Great Britain or the United
States represents one in which a partly laboristic distribution is
sometimes mistakenly avowed to rest on the principle of human
rights. The mistake is a profound one. To correct that mistake, it is
necessary to re-examine the capitalistic economy of Great Britain
or the United States before the power of labor unions, supported
by the power of government and by the legislative regulation of
wages and hours and the policy of full employment, raised the gen-
eral standard of living to its present level.
We have already observed that in an economy in which the
private ownership of capital prevails and in which that ownership
of capital is highly concentrated in the hands of a small class, a
capitalistic form of distribution necessarily gives the major portion
of the wealth produced to a few men or families, and leaves for the
49 The principle of charity or welfare is thus qualified by a principle of expedi-
ency in Soviet Russia’s purely laboristic form of distribution. We shall see pres-
ently that a principle of expediency may enter into other forms of distribution,
as, for example, in the partly laboristic and partly capitalistic form of distribution
which has developed in Britain and America in the last forty years.
112
majority of the population a residue so small that their standard of
living is at a subsistence level or less.
Is the principle underlying such a capitalistic distribution just?
And, we cannot help asking also, is it expedient?
We have already indicated the answer that must be given to the
first question. We pointed out in the preceding chapter that one
principle of justice, i.e., the principle of distribution, can be opera-
tive in a society that is unjust in other respects, i.e., by violating the
principles of participation and limitation. We also pointed out ear-
lier in this chapter that an economy achieves justice in distribution
when its form of distribution matches its mode of production.
Thus, if an economy that is capitalist in its mode of production has
a capitalistic form of distribution, it achieves justice in respect to
distribution, but it may nevertheless be quite unjust in other re-
spects.
A capitalist economy in which large numbers of men cannot
effectively participate in the production of wealth because the
ownership of capital is concentrated in the hands of the few is
hardly a just economy. Though its capitalistic form of distribution
is based on full respect for the property rights of the few who are
capitalists, the economy violates two of the three principles of jus-
tice––the principles of participation and of limitation.
The economic hardship, or, worse, the abject misery of the
great mass of men, was the immediate consequence of the injustice
that was done in the capitalist economies of Great Britain and the
United States during the nineteenth century. The cause was not the
private ownership of capital, which is as just as the private owner-
ship of labor power; nor was it the purely capitalistic form of dis-
tribution, which is also in itself quite just in an economy that is
capitalist in its mode of production. The cause was the highly concen-
trated ownership of capital.
In addition to being unjust, with deplorable consequences for
the welfare of the masses, the capitalist economy we have just been
describing would have “sowed the seeds of its own destruction,” as
Marx predicted, had its capitalistic form of distribution continued
113
without modification. With the major portion of the wealth going
to the one-tenth of the population who were the owners of capital,
the residue that went to the remaining nine-tenths gave them insuf-
ficient purchasing power to support a high level of production.
Only by raising the general standard of living and creating a
widely diffused purchasing power can the consumption of wealth
support mass production in a capitalist economy. Hence if it was
nothing else, the transformation of the form of distribution from a
purely capitalistic one into a partly laboristic one was highly expe-
dient. It kept the economy going, and saved it from the disastrous
climax of the cycle of boom-and-bust.
There is ample evidence of such motivation in the explicitly
stated policies of the New Deal, as well as in the declarations of
those union leaders who picture labor as in partnership with capital
to make capitalism a prosperous economy for the welfare of all
concerned.50 But the action of labor unions and the effort of gov-
ernment regulation to create a partly laboristic form of distribution
were not entirely motivated by considerations of expediency with
an eye to keeping the economy afloat. The original, abiding, and
50 See Philip Murray’s Annual Report for 1952. “Our mass production eco n-
omy,” he wrote, “can expand on a healthy basis in the long run, only if it is
based on rising levels of consumption of the output produced by expanding
productive facilities.” He argued that high levels of production and employment,
high wages, high volume sales in mass markets and narrower profit margins are
to the common interest of capital and labor. It is interesting to observe that
more than a hundred years earlier, in 1827, the Preamble of the Mechanics’ Un-
ion of Trade Associations in Philadelphia argued in a similar vein: “If the mass
of the people were enabled by their labor to procure for themselves and families
a full and abundant supply of the comforts and conveniences of life, the co n-
sumption . . . would amount to at least twice the quantity it does at present, and
of course the demand, by which alone employers are enabled to subsist or ac-
cumulate would likewise be increased in an equal proportion. . . . All are depend-
ent on the demand which there is for the use of their skill, service, or capital, and
the demand must ever be regulated by the ability or inability of the great mass of
people to purchase and consume” (reprinted in The People Shall Judge, Chicago,
1953: Vol. 1, pp. 580-583).
114
deeper interest was in alleviating human misery and improving the
lot of the masses.
Without excluding or minimizing a concern for the stability of
the economy, the controlling principle in the transformation of the
form of distribution stemmed from deeply humanitarian mo-
tives—concern for pressing human needs and the economic wel-
fare of the “forgotten man.” These good purposes, as well as the
efficiency and prosperity of the economy itself, were served by cre-
ating a mixed form of distribution which over the years has be-
come more and more laboristic, less and less capitalistic.51
These good ends were served, however, without correcting the
injustices of the nineteenth-century capitalism which was self-
destructive as well as inhumane because, with a highly concentrated
private ownership of capital, it maintained a purely capitalistic form
of distribution. On the contrary, the mixture of a laboristic with a
capitalistic form of distribution in a capitalist economy, especially
in a technologically advanced one in which nine-tenths of the
wealth is produced by capital instruments, does serious injustice to
the owners of capital. It invades, attenuates, or erodes their prop-
erty rights in capital in proportion as it makes a larger and larger
cut in the distributive share which should be theirs by right of earn-
ing it in order to increase the distributive share given to the owners
of labor power, which is for the most part not earned by them.
The present capitalist economy of Great Britain and the United
States, therefore, not only fails to correct the injustices that it
inherits from the last century, but also adds thereto the injustice of
a form of distribution that has become more and more laboristic,
as measured by the increasing portion of the wealth that is rightly
due to the owners of capital but goes to labor. The fact that this
transformation in the distribution of wealth can be “justified” by
51 We have referred to the principle of distribution that rests on a concern for
human needs as one of charity. It can also be called the “welfare principle” or
the “principle of socialism.” The present capitalist economy of Great Britain and
the United States, which we have described as one in which the form of distribu-
tion is mixed (partly laboristic, and partly capitalistic) can, therefore, also be de-
scribed as “welfare capitalism” or “partly socialized capitalism.”
115
formation in the distribution of wealth can be “justified” by the
ends it has served, i.e., the general welfare of our people and the
prosperity of our economy, may make it humane or expedient, but
it does not make it just.
To be just, the production and distribution of wealth must be
organized so that all human rights are fully respected––the right of
everyone to receive the full share of what his productive property
produces as well as the right of everyone to participate in produc-
tion through the use of property which, under a capitalist mode of
production, is capable of earning a viable income or a decent living.
To correct the injustices that were present in capitalism in its
first stage and still exist as a result of the highly concentrated pri-
vate ownership of capital, and to correct in addition the injustice
that has recently been introduced by an increasingly laboristic form
of distribution under the principle of charity, welfare, or socialism,
it is necessary to reinstate a purely capitalistic form of distribution,
with full respect for the rights of private property in capital, and at
the same time to innovate a widely diffused private ownership of
capital.
Only in that way can all relevant economic rights be safe-
guarded. Only in that way can all three principles of economic jus-
tice be embodied in a capitalist economy. Only in that way can a
capitalist economy be justly organized. Only in that way can the
prosperity of a capitalist economy be preserved or augmented, and
the economic welfare of the population be cared for, without re-
course to expedients that are not only unjust because they invade
property rights but are also inimical to freedom because they in-
volve concentrations of political and economic power in the same
hands.
The so-called communist revolution established the complete
socialization of a capitalist economy. Completely socialized capital-
ism may be able to operate with enough efficiency to ensure some
measure of economic prosperity. It may be able, by a purely labor-
istic form of distribution, to take care of human needs and even to
provide a gradually improved standard of living for all. But if it
116
succeeds in these respects, it can do so only at the sacrifice of jus-
tice and liberty, of personal rights and individual freedoms––all of
which are bound up with the institution of private property and the
right of a man to live on what he earns by property over which he
has exclusive control.
What is called for is the capitalist revolution, a revolution
which not only serves the cause of justice and liberty, but also has
the power to create, more surely and fully, an efficient and pros-
perous economy, and a standard of living that amply provides for
the economic welfare of all.
The path the capitalist revolution will take faces in exactly the
opposite direction from that taken by the communist revolution. It
seeks to diffuse the private ownership of capital instead of abolish-
ing it entirely. It seeks to make all men capitalists instead of pre-
venting anyone from being a capitalist by making the State the only
capitalist.
The capitalist revolution also turns away from the mixtures and
confusions of economies that are partly socialized or laboristic
capitalisms. But it does not turn back to the unjust and inhumane
capitalism of the nineteenth century. It moves forward to the full
fruition of the principles of justice that were possible under capital-
ism from the beginning. It seeks to make an economy that is capi-
talist in its mode of production one that is also purely capitalistic in
its mode of distribution, as it should be. And by seeking to make all
men capitalists, it strives to make effective their right to live on
what they can earn by their capital property as well as by their la-
bor, as men should be able to live in a society where capital instruments pro-
duce most of the wealth.
117
7 THE ECONOMIC FUTURE
THE FOUR CAPITALISMS
In the preceding chapter, we distinguished four forms of capital-
ism. Of these, three belong to the past or present. One belongs to
the future. It is the object of the capitalist revolution to bring that
one into being.
We have so far identified the three forms of capitalism that be-
long to the past or present by referring to historic examples of
them. For ease of reference, we would now like to substitute
tag-names that will serve as shorthand devices for remembering
their salient characteristics. We propose the following nomencla-
ture.
(1) The form of capitalism which existed in Great Britain during the
nineteenth century and which persisted in a waning state until the end of the
First World War. In view of the fact that this was the original form
taken by capitalism with the emergence of industrial production,
we think it is fitting to call it “primitive capitalism.” It represents
the least developed stage of industrial production as well as the
first stage in the organization of an economy in which power-
driven machinery and other capital instruments slowly became the
chief productive force.
118
The distinguishing characteristics of primitive capitalism are:
(a) private ownership of capital instruments; (b) no limitation on,
and hence undue concentration of, such ownership; (c) a capitalis-
tic form of distribution with full returns to the owners of capital of
what their productive property earns; (d) a bare subsistence stan-
dard of living, or worse, for the laboring masses in the population.
(2) The form of capitalism which exists in Soviet Russia today. Two
names suggest themselves as appropriate: “completely socialized
capitalism” and “State capitalism.” The first points to the form of
distribution, the second to the mode of ownership which prevails.
We will use “State capitalism” because it is briefer.
The distinguishing characteristics of State capitalism are: (a)
public ownership of capital instruments; (b) complete concentra-
tion of such ownership in the hands of the State, or in what for all
practical purposes become the hands of the bureaucrats who wield
the political power of the State; (c) a laboristic form of distribution,
controlled and administered by the State for the economic welfare
of the workers; (d) a much improved basic standard of living for
the masses, with a scale of differential incomes added to provide
incentives, not earned rewards, for the most highly productive
types of labor.
(3) The form of capitalism which exists in the United States and Great
Britain today and which has been developing since the end of the First World
War and the rise of labor unions to power with the help of the countervailing
power of government. This form of capitalism has been called “collec-
tive capitalism,” “managerial capitalism,” and “laboristic capital-
ism.”52 It can also be called “mixed capitalism,” “partly socialized
52 In a paper entitled “Administered Prices and All That,” delivered before the
Western Economic Association on August 28, 1957, Professor Edwin G.
Nourse employed such phrases as “corporate capitalism” and “managerial capi-
talism” in order to distinguish the present form of capitalism from what he
called the “traditional” or “proprietary capitalism” of the nineteenth century. He
attributed to Professor Sumner Schlicter the description of our present eco-
nomic system as a “laboristic economy,” but felt that it was more accurate to
describe it as a “laboristic capitalism,” because, as he said, “what we have is not
119
capitalism,” or “welfare capitalism.” All these names point to the
fact that the form of distribution is partly capitalistic and partly la-
boristic. The last two, in addition, point to the controlling principle
of the distribution insofar as it is laboristic––concern for the needs
of those who participate in production through labor alone, not for
what they are justly entitled to by such participation as measured by
its contribution. We will use “mixed capitalism,” (and sometimes
“the mixed economy”) as the tag-name for this form because it
calls attention to the mixture of conflicting elements, some of
which are vestiges of primitive capitalism and some of which are
halfway measures whose tendency, if they continue unchecked,
would push this economy further and further toward completely
socialized or State capitalism.
The distinguishing characteristics of mixed capitalism are: (a)
vestigial or nominal private ownership of capital instruments; (b)
no limitation on, and hence still undue concentration of, such
ownership, though that concentration is somewhat less than in
primitive capitalism; (c) a form of distribution that is partly capital-
istic and partly laboristic, according to which owners of capital re-
ceive some share of what their property produces but much less
than they are entitled to as measured by its contribution, and ac-
cording to which those who participate in production through me-
chanical labor alone receive a much larger share than such partici-
pation earns by its contribution; (d) a generally high standard of
living for the laboring masses in the population.
(4) The form of capitalism which will exist, probably in the United States
first, after the capitalist revolution has brought into being the first justly organ-
ized capitalist economy. This is the only one of the four forms for
fully laborism but merely modified capitalism.” See Hearings before the Subcommittee
on Antitrust and Monopoly of the Committee of the Judiciary, U. S. Senate, July 9-16,
1957, Government Printing Office, Washington: pp. 188-190. The phrase “co l-
lective capitalism” was coined by Professor Gardiner C. Means and employed in
a lecture entitled “Collective Capitalism and Economic Theory,” delivered at the
Marshall Whythe Symposium, College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Vir-
ginia, March, 1957. This lecture is also reprinted in the Senate Hearings cited
above: see pp. 104-114.
120
which it is difficult to find a readily appropriate name. As con-
trasted with primitive capitalism, it might be called “mature capital-
ism” or “fully developed capitalism” to indicate its highly a dvanced
stage of industrial production; but both State capitalism and mixed
capitalism will also enjoy the advantages of the technological ad-
vances to be made in the next fifty years. As contrasted with State
capitalism, it might be called “private property capitalism,” but that
does not distinguish it from mixed capitalism in which capital in-
struments are, nominally at least, still privately owned. As con-
trasted with mixed capitalism, it might be called “pure capitalism”
to indicate that its form of distribution is purely capitalistic, i.e.,
without any admixture of a socialized laboristic form of distribu-
tion; but primitive capitalism can also be called “pure” in the same
sense.
“Just capitalism” would be appropriate and distinctive be-
cause, of the four forms of capitalism, this is the only one that em-
bodies all the relevant principles of economic justice. But the
phrase “just capitalism” is open to misinterpretation, and it would
be burdensome to be sure each time that “just” carried the conno-
tation of “justice.” Hence we have decided to adopt the word
“Capitalism,” with a capital “C” but without any qualifying adjec-
tives, as the name for the capitalist economy to be created by the
capitalist revolution.53
The distinguishing characteristics of Capitalism are: (a) the pri-
vate ownership of capital instruments, restored to full effect from
its present nominal condition and attenuated rights; (b) the widest
possible diffusion of such ownership to provide effective participa-
53 The phrase “People’s Capitalism” is currently used in a sense that is vaguely
suggestive of what we mean by Capitalism. But those who use it often fail to
acknowledge explicitly that what they mean by “People’s Capitalism” does not
yet exist in the United States; nor do they explicitly recognize all the changes that
would have to take place in our present mixed capitalism in order to bring it into
existence. The phrase is, therefore, almost as much an advertising slogan, and as
empty of real content, as the one on which it is modeled––“People’s Democ-
racy,” the term used by the Communist countries to claim for themselves a non-
capitalistic form of democracy which does not exist and cannot.
121
tion in the production of wealth for all members of the economy;
(c) a capitalistic form of distribution with fully paid out capital
earnings to owners of capital, and with an ultimate reduction of the
wages of labor to what labor’s contribution earns, as measured by
demand under freely competitive conditions; (d) a high standard of
living for all, based on a minimum viable income for individuals or
families, derived, in most cases, from participation in production as
owners of capital or as owners of labor and capital.
A quick comparison of the four forms of capitalism will reveal
that certain characteristics are common to two or more.
Calling all four “forms of capitalism” implies that all are alike in
being capitalist as to mode of production. But primitive capitalism
differs from all the rest in respect to industrial development. With
the coming of the second industrial revolution, of which automa-
tion is only one harbinger, State capitalism and mixed capitalism, if
they survive another half century, will exceed the productivity of
the most advanced industrialism that exists today to a much greater
extent than the productivity of the United States or Soviet Russia
today exceeds that of primitive capitalism at the end of the nine-
teenth century. On this score we think that Capitalism, by its un-
checked pursuit and promotion of technological advances, will be
able to go further than either State capitalism or mixed capitalism.
It will most fully realize the productive potentialities of capital in-
struments.
State capitalism, mixed capitalism and the Capitalism of the fu-
ture are alike in another and related respect, in which they all differ
from primitive capitalism; namely, with regard to the economic
welfare of the whole population or the general standard of living.
Though they achieve that desirable objective by different means
and under the aegis of different controlling principles, they all are
able to remove the economic hardships and widespread misery that
existed under primitive capitalism. Given foreseeable advances in
productivity, both State capitalism and mixed capitalism, continu-
ing along their present lines, will be able to go much further in this
direction; but here as before we think that Capitalism will be able
122
to go furthest by reason of its principles, precisely because they are
principles of justice rather than of charity or welfare.
In one further respect, State capitalism, mixed capitalism and
Capitalism have some affinity, and one that is not shared at all by
primitive capitalism. Where primitive capitalism was doomed to
self-destruction by a mode of ownership and a form of distribution
that prevented mass consumption from supporting mass produc-
tion in the open market, State capitalism is able to avoid the prob-
lem by controlling consumption as well as production; mixed capi-
talism has found that the operation of its welfare principle is also
able to create effective mass purchasing power at the same time
that it creates a generally high standard of living for the masses;
and the Capitalism of the future will be able to avoid the orgy of
overproduction and its resulting monetary inflation that are en-
tailed by mixed capitalism’s misguided pursuit of full employment.
All three, by quite different means, can operate a capitalist econ-
omy for a time at least with the minimum efficiency that is neces-
sary for its survival; but here, once again, we think that Capitalism
can attain a higher level of efficiency, and stability as well, without
the human waste and moral corruption that is involved in mixed
capitalism’s needless overproduction of wealth and without State
capitalism’s suppression of freedom. Once a decent standard of
living is achieved for all, and as soon as military and defense ex-
penditures can be kept from increasing or can perhaps even be re-
duced, an economic balance can be achieved under which our
technology can advance and our standard of living can be raised to
any reasonable limit without the simultaneous waste involved in
the production of surpluses for the mere sake of providing full
employment.
On the three points we have so far considered, Capitalism is
more like State capitalism and mixed capitalism than like primitive
capitalism. The only respect in which Capitalism resembles primi-
tive capitalism is in giving full effect to the private ownership of
capital through a capitalistic form of distribution which operates
solely under the principle of apportioning distributive shares of the
wealth produced on the basis of contributions to its production,
123
the value of which is measured by demand in a freely competitive
market.
With regard to the institution of private property, mixed capi-
talism somewhat resembles primitive capitalism and the Capitalism
of the future. On this score, it is unlike State capitalism. But in cer-
tain essentials mixed capitalism has a much deeper affinity with
State capitalism; for, while it involves the nominal private owner-
ship of capital instruments, it does not give full effect to the rights
of such ownership under its partly capitalistic and partly laboristic
form of distribution. As partly socialized or welfare capitalism, it
has strong leanings toward the completely socialized welfare state
of State capitalism. A serious economic crisis, which might be pre-
cipitated by uncontrollable technological advances, or by monetary
inflation necessarily resulting from its policy of full employment,
would unquestionably bend it further in that direction.
Finally, there is the one crucial respect in which Capitalism
stands completely by itself. It is the only form of capitalism which
is built on the diffused private ownership of capital instruments.
And it is for that reason the only form of capitalism that is a justly
organized economy.
THE THREE ALTERNATIVES
The industrial economy, i.e., capitalism, in one form or another, is
here to stay. Except for some major cataclysm that would reduce
the world to rubble, destroy civilization as we know it, and con-
demn the scattered survivors to primitive modes of existence, there
is little or no chance of a return to the laborist economies of the
past. Nor would anyone in his right mind wish to give up the bene-
fits of industrial production. Only those who are deluded by hallu-
cinations of a golden age that once existed can be so blind to the
potentialities of a civilization built on the utilization of machines
and other capital instruments rather than on the enslavement of
men as to think that the past can hold a candle to the future.
124
It is true that the pre-industrial class-divided societies of the
past achieved for the few certain refinements and permitted those
few to achieve certain excellences that seem to be threatened by
the emergence of a mass, or one-class, society in the twentieth cen-
tury.54 But when we compare a mass society with civilizations built
on the slavery of the submerged masses, we must remember that
the ultimate measure of a society’s worth is its potentiality for de-
velopment. This applies to the capitalist economy as compared
with the laborist and slave economies of the past.
If it was a great step forward in the history of man for the rise
of civilization to permit a small class of free men to engage in the
liberal pursuits of leisure and to advance civilization itself by their
efforts, how much greater is the step that can be taken by our
emergent mass society when it sees how to turn the twin institu-
tions of democracy and capitalism into a school for the good use
of the political and economic freedom they confer on all men alike.
Like the industrial production of wealth, the classless organiza-
tion of society is here to stay––in one form or another. Our only
choice is as to form. But we do have a choice. The totalitarian state
with a regimented population of equal and uniform puppets is no
more the inevitable crystallization of the mass society than State
capitalism is––as Marx thought it was––the one form toward
which an industrial economy inevitably tends.
With capitalism here to stay, we are confronted with three al-
ternatives, and only three. For most of the English-speaking peo-
54 With prophetic vision, Alexis de Tocqueville foresaw in 1835 most of the so-
cial, political, economic and cultural problems that would confront a mass soci-
ety as it developed under what he called “conditions of equality.” But de Toc-
queville also faced the future with the faith that Providence, in decreeing the
inexorable progress of society from conditions favorable for the few to condi-
tions favorable for all, challenged man to solve the problems incidental to such
progress, and thereby make it thoroughly benign. He closed Democracy in America
with these words: “The nations of our time cannot prevent the conditions of
men from becoming equal; but it depends upon themselves whether the princi-
ple of equality is to lead them to servitude or freedom, to knowledge or barba-
rism, to prosperity or wretchedness.”
125
ples, who would not think for a moment of exchanging life in the
United States or in the British Commonwealth for life in Soviet
Russia, these quickly reduce to two.
We can choose to perpetuate the mixed capitalism we have
created in the last quarter century, with the hope that we can keep
it mixed, or we can undo the mixture by eliminating the laboristic
and socialistic aspects of our economy, with their tendency toward
State capitalism, and replace them with the principles of justice that
would create Capitalism. Our choice, in short, is between the status
quo and the capitalist revolution.55
The case for the capitalist revolution may be sufficiently clear
from what has already been said. It should be for those who un-
derstand the principles of economic justice and who see that the
just organization of a capitalist economy is not only desirable in
itself but, more than that, indispensable to economic freedom, to
political democracy, and to the fulfillment of the promise of a good
human life for all men. Thus persuaded, they may wish only for a
summary statement of the theory of Capitalism as the ground plan
of the revolution, and for a projection of the practical program by
which it can be accomplished.
A brief summary of the theory will be given in Chapter Eight,
and a feasible, though tentative, program of practical steps will be
outlined in Part II, which follows Chapter Eight. In the rest of this
chapter, we shall address ourselves to those who may not yet see
that our choice is between a socialist revolution, on the one hand,
and the capitalist revolution, on the other. They may not realize
that mixed capitalism as well as State capitalism is a product of the
socialization of an economy that is capitalist in its mode of produc-
55 Though we have treated primitive capitalism as one of the four forms of capi-
talism, it does not present a real alternative in the twentieth century. The succes-
sive waves of the scientific-industrial revolution exclude it from sensible consid-
eration, just as much as the development of our conscience excludes the slave
economy. Furthermore, it is morally almost as repugnant to us as a slave eco n-
omy, both on the grounds of justice and on a humanitarian concern for human
welfare. If all this were not enough to eliminate it forever from our thought, its
self-destructive tendencies would by now have removed it from the running.
126
tion. The same errors underlie both, and the same threats to free-
dom are present in both. What the completed socialist revolution
has done to man and society, the creeping socialist revolution is in
the process of doing.
THE TWO SOCIALIST REVOLUTIONS
(1) The Completed Socialist Revolution. We said that State capitalism is
not a real alternative for us. Even if it could show itself to be the
most productive, prosperous, and powerful of the forms of capital-
ism, and even if it could create the highest standard of living for all,
we would have none of it. An American socialist like Norman
Thomas, and an English socialist like John Strachey, reject it as
vigorously as those among us who would not regard themselves as
socialists.
The attitude all of us share springs from our devotion to de-
mocracy and from our wish to preserve and strengthen our indi-
vidual freedoms and our free political institutions. We are all con-
vinced that State capitalism cannot operate except in a totalitarian
state. But the socialists among us, together with those who have
leanings toward socialism whether they know it or not, do not see
that an advanced capitalist economy without the private ownership
of capital instruments and without full respect for the rights of
such ownership cannot be operated without one or another type of
bureaucratic management which inevitably concentrates economic
and political power in the hands of a small clique.
Hence even though State capitalism, as exemplified in the
completed socialist revolution, repels rather than attracts us, it is
useful for us to look at it a moment longer. It does more than offer
us the clearest example of what we are trying to avoid. If we are
trying to avoid certain tendencies carried to the extreme by the
completed social revolution, we should recoil from those same
tendencies manifested in the process of the creeping socialist revo-
127
lution which our mixed capitalist economy has been quietly carry-
ing on.
Orthodox defenders of the Marxist faith may argue that State
capitalism as currently practiced in Soviet Russia does not repre-
sent the completed socialist revolution, but only the penultimate stage
in the process that leads to the ultimate creation of the truly com-
munist society. They believe that the “dictatorship of the proletar-
iat,” administered by the Communist Party, is a necessary step in
the process of expropriating private property in capital and putting
it to social use; but that it is only a step in the revolutionary proc-
ess, not its culmination. That will inevitably be reached when the
State itself withers away and, in place of the oppression that any
form of political government involves, the only government will
consist in the people’s co-operative management of things rather
than in the rule of men over men.
The Marxist thinks that the withering away of the State follows
as inevitably from the dictatorship of the proletariat as that in turn
follows from the forces at work in any capitalist economy. With
the rise of capitalism, it is maintained, the class war reaches the
point at which the owners of capital and the propertyless (or rather
capital-less) owners of labor power are aligned against one another
in a death struggle which can have only one outcome. According to
Marxists, the resolution of the class war leads to the ideal classless
society, but its route takes it through a temporary interregnum,
which they call “the dictatorship of the proletariat,” and we call
“the totalitarian State.”
Prophecies that do not give dates can never be refuted by facts.
But they do become incredible in proportion as the things we
know make what they predict look improbable. It is, to say the
least, improbable that the leaders of the Communist Party, who
administer the dictatorship of the proletariat and hold in their
hands the greatest concentration of economic and political power
ever consolidated on earth, will ever voluntarily divest themselves
of such power in order to bring about the withering away of the
State and to make way for the ideal classless society.
128
Even if they were dedicated and holy men before they became
bureaucrats, the power they then acquired would corrupt them,
and being almost absolute would corrupt them almost completely.
The peaceful transformation of the State capitalism of the totalitar-
ian state into the communist-capitalism of the whole community
co-operatively managing its capital without any need of coercive
regulation by political government is, therefore, highly improbable.
A violent uprising of the Russian people may overthrow the
dictatorship of the Communist Party, but it will not, because it
cannot, foment the withering away of the State or transform the
totalitarian state into the communist classless society. A peaceful
community without the institutions of government is impossible
and will remain impossible, to paraphrase Hamilton, as long as
men are not angels.
Marx was right in his abhorrence of all the class-divided socie-
ties of the past and of his own day. He was right in his condemna-
tion of the bitter class war in all its phases. He was right in his
hope, and we hope he was right in his prediction, that the ultimate
outcome of this long struggle of class against class would be the
classless society––not only politically classless but also economi-
cally classless. But he was wrong in his mythical or utopian dream
of the form the classless society would or could take.
This is not the only point on which Marx finally went wrong
after being partly right. He was right in his condemnation of the
injustice of primitive capitalism. He was right in his moral indigna-
tion over the human misery that its injustice caused; and though he
was not a lone voice in his outcry against it, he, perhaps more than
any other man, so forcefully stated the case that no one thereafter
could ever make light of it. He was right in his enthusiasm for the
unqualified superiority of the new capitalist economy over all the
laborist economies of the past so far as its sheer power of produc-
ing wealth is concerned. He was also right in his sense that the in-
justice of a system in which close to nine-tenths of the wealth pro-
duced went to about one-tenth of the population (i.e., those who
owned the capital instruments of production) somehow stemmed,
129
not from the capitalist mode of production, but from the mode of
capital ownership together with a capitalistic form of distribution.
In all this he was right, but he was wrong––crucially wrong––
when he finally put his finger on the root of the trouble. He
thought the root cause of the injustice of primitive capitalism was
the private ownership of capital. Private property in capital, he
thought, operating under a capitalistic form of distribution, inevi-
tably resulted in the maldistribution of wealth with all its conse-
quences: human misery, almost slavery, for the submerged masses,
and a concentration of economic and political power in the hands
of a small class of capitalists.
Though he came very near to putting his finger on the right
spot, he missed it. But for that fatal error, Marx might have advo-
cated the capitalist revolution instead of the socialist revolution.
The root of the trouble was not the private ownership of capital,
but the highly concentrated private ownership of capital. That being
the cause, the remedy lies not in abolishing private property in
capital, as Marx recommended, but rather in diffusing the private
ownership of capital by bringing into existence new capitalists at a
rate commensurate with the shift in the burden of production
from human toil to capital instruments. When that is accom-
plished under Capitalism, a capitalistic distribution of wealth will
produce results the very opposite of those produced under primi-
tive capitalism.
Marx’s fatal error in diagnosing the cause of the injustice in
primitive capitalism was intertwined with all the other errors he
made, both in his theory of capitalism and in his revolutionary
program. His labor theory of value, which is pivotal in his theory
of capitalist production, served to rationalize or “justify” the ex-
propriation of private property in capital; for if, as he claimed, la-
bor and labor alone produces all wealth, even in a capitalist econ-
omy (machines, he said, represent nothing but accumulated or
“congealed” labor), then all the wealth produced should in justice
be distributed to those who produce it. Since, in his view, the
owner of capital produces nothing, simply by owning machines
130
and raw materials and allowing them to be used by labor, any re-
turn to the capitalist, Marx argued, is unearned increment obtained
by the exploitation of labor. He therefore concluded that the only
way to prevent such exploitation and unearned increment is to
have society as a whole, organized as a State, take over all capital
instruments and control them for the benefit of the producers of
wealth, to whom all the wealth should go. To accomplish a labor-
istic distribution of wealth, the State must not only control the
capital instruments; it must also control the distribution of the
wealth that a society of laboring men produces. Thus the labor
theory of value, with its consequences, reaches the result at which
Marx aimed from the beginning––from the moment he made his
mistaken diagnosis that the private ownership of capital was the
root cause of the trouble.56
At this point, however, Marx departed from one concern with
which he began. That he began with a concern about justice is
plain in the light of such words as “exploitation” and “unearned
increment.” But it is equally clear that he ended by substituting
charity for justice. His famous formula––”from each [laborer] ac-
cording to his ability, and to each according to his needs”––totally
divorces distribution from contribution. It cannot, therefore, be a
principle of distributive justice. Since it is determined by need
rather than by earning, it is a principle of charity, more often re-
ferred to as a principle of “social welfare.”
56 Since that diagnosis was wrong, there is no need here to expose all the falla-
cies in the labor theory of value. That is amply done in Capitalism, which will
soon be published. A chapter of this book, entitled “Karl Marx: The Almost
Capitalist,” was in American Bar Association Journal, March, 1957. It is important
here, however, to point out that economists who claim to reject the labor theory
of value nevertheless swallow its central error whenever they translate the in-
creased productiveness of the capital of a capitalist economy into assertions
about the increased productiveness of labor. They sometimes even talk as if the
machines were not themselves active factors in production but passive instru-
ments that derive all their productivity from labor. It is not surprising, therefore,
that such economists should be exponents of the laboristic and socialistic forms
of distribution adopted by our mixed economy or welfare capitalism.
131
Charitable distributions may be necessary in any economy. We
know that the injustice of primitive capitalism made them neces-
sary in the nineteenth century in order to relieve human beings in
dire distress and to preserve those whose very existence was at
stake. But it makes a considerable difference whether charity is a c-
complished by private gifts or by a public distribution of wealth, as
under State capitalism; and whether charity is auxiliary to the econ-
omy’s system of distribution or is its central principle, as it is under
socialism.57
The fact that under State capitalism the distribution of wealth,
as well as the production and consumption of wealth, is controlled
by the State illustrates the ancient truth that a little error in the be-
ginning can lead to enormous ones in the end. The crucial error
Marx made about the precise cause of the malfunctioning of primi-
tive capitalism led him to recommend a system which is more un-
just and more inimical to human freedom than the one it proposed
to supplant. For if the cause of the injustice and the danger to
freedom in primitive capitalism came from the concentration of
economic and political power in the hands of a small group of pri-
vate capitalists, how much more serious is the threat to freedom
when all economic power is concentrated in the hands of the men
who also hold all political power as representatives of the mono-
lithic State. And how much more far-reaching is the injustice that
results from the abolition of private property in capital in order to
avoid the injustice that results from the concentration of its private
ownership.58
57 It also makes a difference whether the charitable distribution, as in Robin
Hood’s case, is made from funds obtained unjustly. The partly laboristic distri-
bution of wealth in our mixed economy comes to that, since it cannot be ac-
complished without cutting deeply into that portion of the wealth which should
go to owners of capital as a just return for the wealth their capital produces.
58 In an article in Reader’s Digest in 1941, Max Eastman, who had been a
socialist, offered his version of the Marxist paradox of good intentions lead-
ing by mistake to results the very opposite of those intended. He wrote: “It
seems obvious to me now––though I have been slow, I must say, in coming to
the conclusion––that the institution of private property is one of the main
things that have given man that limited amount of free and equalness that
132
However great was the political power that private capitalists
wielded under primitive capitalism, the political power of the bu-
reaucrats is far greater under State capitalism, because they control
all capital property in the name of the State. Under such condi-
tions, the society may be nominally classless in an economic sense,
according to the fiction that all men are proletariat and none owns
capital property. But, the fiction aside, the facts are clearly the very
opposite. State capitalism creates a class-divided society, in which
there is a ruling class (the bureaucrats or leaders of the Party) and a
subject class (the mass of the workers). In addition to being the
ruling class, the bureaucrats are in fact the owning class; for, by
having complete control of the capital owned by the State, they are
in effect its possessors.
As we are writing, Milovan Djilas, formerly vice-president of
Yugoslavia and a top functionary in its Communist Party, has just
been tried and sentenced to seven years’ imprisonment for having
the courage to publish a book in which he proclaimed that the effec-
tive ownership, i.e., the control, of productive property under State
capitalism is vested in the leading members of the ruling party––the
new class. In that book, Djilas wrote:
As defined by Roman law, property constitutes the use, enjoyment,
and disposition of material goods. The Communist political bu-
reaucracy class obtains its power, privileges, ideology, and its cus-
toms from one specific form of ownership––collective ownership–
which the class administers and distributes in the name of the na-
tion and society.59
Marx hoped to render infinite by abolishing this institution. Strangely enough
Marx was the first to see this. He is the one who informed us, looking back-
wards, that the evolution of private capitalism with its free market had been a
precondition for the evolution of all our democratic freedoms. It never occurred
to him, looking forward, that if this was so, these other freedoms might disap-
pear with the abolition of the free market.”
59 The New Class, New York, 1957: pp. 44-45. Immanual Kant, John Adams,
Alexander Hamilton, and even John Stuart Mill doubted that a man was in a
position to exercise political freedom unless he had a minimum degree of
economic independence, i.e., unless he did not depend for his subsistence on
133
The tragic consequences of the fatal flaw of Marx’s initial error
have not yet been fully stated. The deepest reversal of all lies in the
fact that Marx, recognizing that a capitalist mode of production
had the power to emancipate men from toil, nevertheless made
“the equal liability of all to labor” a cardinal tenet of the socialist
revolution. He should have insisted instead upon the participation
of all in the production of wealth by means of capital property, so
that all could enjoy a decent standard of living with as little labor as
possible.
Marx recognized this when, comparing the condition of
capitalists and workers under primitive capitalism, he claimed that
the capitalists had all the advantages and privileges that made life
worth living. Yet under State capitalism the State is, nominally at
least, the only capitalist, and so all men are, in theory, forced to be
laborers. Even were State capitalism to create a classless society, it
would be the wrong kind of classless society, for the ideal that is
indicated by capitalist production is a classless society of capital-
ists.60
The Marxist error here is flagrant. If we recognize that a repub-
lic in which only a few men are citizens is politically unjust, we can
also see that the remedy is to make all men citizens, not to abolish
citizenship. Hence when we recognize that an industrial economy
in which only a few men are capitalists is economically unjust, we
the arbitrary will of others. The laboring classes during the first century of capi-
talism, before they secured the protection of unions and of government, were
frequently thought not to deserve suffrage because they did not have the requi-
site economic independence to use the political freedom it conferred. Clearly,
under State capitalism, those who depend for their very existence, not to men-
tion their livelihood, on the arbitrary will of the State or its bureaucrats have as
little or less freedom than those who, under primitive capitalism, depended for
their subsistence on the arbitrary will of the factory owners.
60 The goal of capitalism first appeared in the life of leisure that was built on
slavery in the laborist economies of civilized antiquity. It was previsioned in oc-
cult fashion in Aristotle’s dream of complete automation, which suggested the
picture of a society in which all men would have the leisure of slave owners be-
cause all would own the inanimate automatic slaves that produce the society’s
wealth.
134
should be able to see that the obvious remedy is to enable all men
to become capitalists, not to make it impossible for anyone to be a
capitalist.
(2) The Creeping Socialist Revolution. The transformation of the
American and British economies during the last half century, and
especially in the last thirty years, has frequently been celebrated by
its apologists as revolutionary. To quote the titles of some of their
books on the subject, this revolution has been called “the manage-
rial revolution” (by James Burnham) and “the twentieth-century
capitalist revolution” (by Adolph Berle). The product of the revo-
lution has been called “modern capitalism,” or “American capital-
ism,” by John Kenneth Galbraith and other American economists.
In our view the most accurate description of the changes now
in progress in the United States and Great Britain is that suggested
by the English socialist, John Strachey. He shows that the changes
in our economy, which the theories of R. H. Tawney and John
Maynard Keynes gave direction to, have progressively socialized it
by introducing a form of distribution that is more and more labor-
istic and less and less capitalistic. Such progressive socialization,
accomplished with little violence, mainly by law, and still going on,
is aptly called a “creeping socialist revolution” in contrast to the
completed one that has produced State capitalism in Soviet Russia.
And the present product of this incomplete or partial socialist
revolution is the partly socialized economy of mixed capitalism.
This is not the place to show by detailed analysis how the eco-
nomic theories of Keynes, Tawney, Berle, and Galbraith rest on an
unwitting acceptance of Marx’s labor theory of value in spite of
explicit protestations to the contrary.61 Our interest here is not in
the theories on the basis of which these economists have recom-
mended the erosion of property rights in capital, the policy of full
employment, administered wages and prices, the welfare principle
61 Such analysis is given in Capitalism in a series of chapters devoted to exposing
the Marxism that is implicit in the economic theories of the most eminent advo-
cates of the revolution which has produced mixed or partly socialized capitalism.
135
in distribution, and the laboristic form of distribution. Our interest
is in comparing the mixed capitalism that has put these recom-
mendations into effect, with the State capitalism that has put into
effect Marx’s more radical recommendations––recommendations,
let it be said, that are more rigorously consistent with the labor
theory of value.
First of all, let us compare the motivation of the two socialist
revolutions. Both tried to correct the deplorable consequences
which followed, in primitive capitalism, from a capitalistic form of
distribution, operating under conditions of highly concentrated
private ownership of capital. Both were instigated by a deep sense
of the injustice that must somehow be responsible for so grievous
a maldistribution of wealth as existed in the first century of capital-
ist production. But they differ in their diagnosis of the cause.
As we have seen, the program of the completed socialist revo-
lution took its departure from the error that private property in
capital itself was the root cause of the injustice; and so it proceeded
to abolish private capitalists and to make the State the only capital-
ist. In contrast, the program of the creeping socialist revolution
took its departure from the error that a purely capitalistic form of
distribution was the root cause of the injustice; and so, while per-
petuating private capitalists, it proceeded to invade and erode their
property rights by mixing an increasingly attenuated capitalistic dis-
tribution of wealth with an ever enlarging laboristic distribution of
it.
Neither revolutionary program proceeded from the right prem-
ise––that the root cause of the injustice was the highly concentrated
private ownership of capital. The completed socialist revolution
does not remedy this by creating a public ownership of capital that
is even more highly concentrated. On the contrary, it multiplies the
injustice by violating all three of the principles on which a capitalist
economy, to be just, must be organized.
So, too, the creeping socialist revolution does an injustice in
order to correct the results of an injustice. It tries to offset the con-
sequences of the concentrated private ownership of capital, which
136
still exists in our mixed economy, by introducing an injustice which
has the opposite effect. It introduces a laboristic form of distribu-
tion which is unjust in an economy that is capitalist in its mode of
production, but which has the effect of raising the general standard
of living. It does this as a countermeasure to the concentrated
ownership of capital which violates the principles of participation
and which, until counteracted, has the further effect of imposing
serious economic hardships on the mass of the population.
So far as their effects are concerned, one injustice can thus act
as a countermeasure to another. But it is one thing to remedy the
deplorable consequences of an injustice by any means––just or un-
just––and quite another to get at the root of the trouble and cor-
rect the injustice itself.
That primitive capitalism needed to be reformed, no one can
doubt. Nor can anyone criticize the two revolutions which, in try-
ing to reform it, were soundly motivated by considerations of jus-
tice and welfare. But the trouble with the two socialist revolu-
tions—the one in Russia and the other in Britain and the United
States––is that they achieved welfare but did not establish justice;
or worse, that they achieved economic welfare (to a higher degree
in the United States than in Russia) by countermeasures that were
themselves unjust (to a lesser degree in the United States than in
Russia). Neither was the right revolution. The capitalist revolution
seeks to rectify the injustices of primitive capitalism and is calcu-
lated to achieve economic welfare to a high degree. It does both
without committing the injustices of State capitalism and mixed
capitalism.
In both State capitalism and mixed capitalism, the general eco-
nomic welfare of the population is achieved by a laboristic distribu-
tion of wealth. Though in one case the distribution is purely labor-
istic and in the other only partly so, both quite obviously must ac-
complish the distribution in some way other than by giving to la-
bor the declining proportion of the total wealth of the economy
which it produces.
137
The laboristic distribution of wealth in our mixed economy
therefore takes on the charitable aspect that it has in State capital-
ism. True, the apologists for mixed capitalism talk as if labor were
justly entitled to all the wage increases it has received. But this soon
becomes double talk, for they acknowledge, on the one hand, that
technological improvements in machinery are mainly responsible
for the increased productiveness of our economy but, on the other
hand, continue to assert that labor itself becomes more and more
productive as the capital instruments with which it co-operates be-
come more powerful productively and have more built-in skill for
their own self-control.
Having introduced a laboristic and charitable form of distribu-
tion, while preserving some of the rights of private property in
capital by partly retaining a capitalistic distribution of wealth, our
mixed economy is a halfway house on the road to complete social-
ism. In State capitalism, the distribution, as well as the production
and consumption of wealth, is controlled by the State. In mixed
capitalism, it is mainly the distribution of wealth that is controlled
by the State. Whereas in Russia that control is exerted by direct
political action, in the United States it is accomplished only in part
by the State––directly through taxation, subsidies, full employment
schemes, welfare programs, and public works––and, in part, indi-
rectly through legislation and administrative procedures that sup-
port the demands of organized labor for a larger distributive share
than labor actually earns.
For the most part, the value of labor is not determined by bar-
gaining in the United States any more than it is in Russia, although
all our talk about “collective bargaining” sometimes deceives us
into thinking so. Bargaining implies a freely competitive market of
sellers and buyers. It implies the right to buy elsewhere if better
terms can be found. The laboristic distribution which organized
labor, with the help of government, has managed to effect has
been achieved by the exercise of political and economic power, not
by bargaining. In Russia, the governing bureaucracy is exclusively
vested with such consolidated economic and political power. In the
United States, the countervailing power of government is in vary-
138
ing degrees wielded in support of the demands of labor, of farm-
ers, and even of industries where it will promote “full employ-
ment,” even though that results in unneeded surpluses.
Hence while the actual operation of State capitalism entails an
almost total loss of economic and political liberty, the actual opera-
tion of mixed capitalism has so far resulted in much less drastic
reductions in our fundamental freedoms. Since mixed capitalism
involves a combination of principles that tend in opposite direc-
tions, it can be said, of course, that in proportion as mixed capital-
ism tends to become more laboristic in the form of its distribution
and more socialistic in the method of effecting such distribution, it
also tends to cause encroachments on economic and political lib-
erty.
The whole story is not told, however, unless we remember that
the creeping socialist revolution and the mixed capitalism it has
produced are now congratulated for having “saved capitalism,”
even by many who once opposed the policies that initiated this
revolution in the early thirties.
We have pointed out in an earlier chapter that, quite apart from
considerations of either justice or charity, the measures which re-
formed primitive capitalism were necessary to prevent the collapse
that Marx had predicted it would suffer. His prediction, it will be
recalled, was made on the assumption that an economy based on
private property in capital, and with highly concentrated ownership
of capital, would persist in maintaining a purely capitalistic form of
distribution. On that assumption, his prediction would have come
true.
The mass of the population would be forced to live at a bare
subsistence level, and so would be unable to pay for the goods and
services that a progressively industrialized economy is able to pro-
duce in ever increasing quantities. For a while the exploitation of
colonial markets might offset the inadequacy of purchasing power
in the domestic market. But this, too, would eventually be ex-
hausted, and then the periodically recurrent crises of overproduc-
139
tion and underconsumption would reach the point where the cycle
of boom-and-bust would end in one last bust.
All the modifications of primitive capitalism that have occurred
gradually in England and the United States between 1850 and 1950
have tended to prevent the predicted collapse of capitalism, under-
stood as a system of industrial production based on private prop-
erty in capital. These reforms were effected by the growth of trade
unions; by legislation in support of “collective bargaining”; by gov-
ernmental regulation of wages and hours and of the prices of many
goods and services; by government spending for welfare, public
works programs and the promotion of full employment; by policies
of taxation which facilitated a laboristic distribution of wealth; by
all sorts of protection for society itself and its members, against the
excesses of laissez-faire––a system which operated, for a short while,
to the immense benefit of the owners of capital property.
It is probably the case that these reforms could not have been
effected by due process of law, had not the political battle, i.e., the
battle for the extension of the franchise, first been won. It was the
gradual emergence of political democracy during the last half of the
nineteenth century and the first decades of the twentieth that made
it possible for primitive capitalism to be overthrown without wide-
spread violence; as the absence of political democracy made re-
course to violent revolution almost a necessity in Russia.
The chief human effect of all these reforms was to raise the
standard of living of the masses; and, at first, that was the only, or
at least the chief, purpose of the effort. But when the cycle of re-
current economic depressions began to give urgent credibility to
Marx’s prediction of the inevitable collapse of private-property
capitalism, another motive for adopting, extending, and accelerat-
ing these reforms came into the picture. It was the motive underly-
ing Henry Ford’s voluntary recommendation of the five-dollar day,
which other capitalists gradually came to see as eminently expedi-
ent.
One way of preventing the threatening collapse, and of correct-
ing the imbalance between mass production and individual con-
140
sumption, was to build up mass purchasing power by raising real
wages. Henry Ford did this in his “revolutionary proposal” to his
fellow capitalists, which subsequently became, in the “revolution-
ary policies” of Franklin Roosevelt, a concerted effort on the part
of the government to “save capitalism” (i.e., capitalism based on
private property in capital) by closing the circuit of production and
consumption.
Capitalism, as a system of industrial production, could not help
becoming more and more productive. If private capitalists could
not bring themselves quickly enough to adopt a laboristic distribution
of wealth, then direct governmental action and the action of trade
unions with governmental support had to be resorted to, in order
to assure consumer demand of such a magnitude as to exert con-
tinual pressure on production in the interest of obtaining a rising
standard of living. As between Henry Ford’s “revolutionary pro-
posal” and Franklin Roosevelt’s “revolutionary policies,” there was
no difference so far as the adoption of a laboristic principle of dis-
tribution is concerned. The difference––and it is a crucial one––lies
rather in the fact that the intervention of government in the dis-
tributive process makes the distribution socialistic in method as
well as laboristic in form; and so, in the process of trying to “save”
a capitalism that is based on private property in capital, it may have
introduced the germ of its destruction.
There is a better and surer way of “saving capitalism” that has
not yet been tried. The general standard of living can be raised to
the point where mass purchasing power, widely diffused among
individuals and families, supports whatever level of production of
goods and services we may desire within the limits of our re-
sources. This can be done without recourse to a laboristic distribu-
tion of wealth. It can be done by a capitalistic distribution of
wealth, if that is based on a widely diffused ownership of capital
instruments.
Some may suppose that the difference between these two ways
of “making capitalism work” is of no significance, because all that
matters is avoiding the collapse that Marx predicted or assuring all
141
men of a decent standard of living. They will not understand the
seriousness of the choice we face.
That choice, we repeat, is between the creeping socialist revolu-
tion we have been carrying on and the capitalist revolution which
remains to be tried. We must not allow our acceptance of the im-
mediate and surface benefits of mixed capitalism to blur our sense
of the radically different directions in which these alternatives take
us. The distance which our partly socialized economy has traveled
along the road to the completely socialized economy of State capi-
talism may not be great enough yet to frighten us. But we should
remember that it is difficult to stand still, especially in an economy
that is subject to constantly accelerated technological improve-
ments, i.e., one in which the contribution to production by capital
is constantly growing as that of labor is diminishing.
If we try to perpetuate our mixed capitalism, but cannot keep
it stabilized in its present state by keeping the conflicting elements
in the mixture in their present proportions, in which direction will
we move?
Forward to a more and more socialized economy with the
specter of State capitalism at the end of the line? As soon as that
prospect becomes real for them, most Americans will recoil from
it.
Backward, then, to a less and less socialized economy but
without any positive solution of all the problems of primitive
capitalism? That way lies self-destruction.
The only way out is not to try to perpetuate our mixed econ-
omy but to transform it into the unmixed one of Capitalism by
extirpating the socialist elements in the mixture. To do this with-
out falling back into primitive capitalism, we must go forward
along another path––the path of the capitalist, rather than the so-
cialist, revolution.
We said earlier that our choice lay between perpetuating mixed
capitalism and establishing Capitalism––that these were the only
real alternatives for Britain and America. But it may be that we do
not really have a choice at all.
142
If mixed capitalism cannot check the inflationary process of
the last thirty years, if it cannot resolve the conflict between its pol-
icy of full employment and the technological advances that lie
ahead, if by the very nature of the elements in the mixture the la-
boristic aspect of the distribution tends to expand and the capitalis-
tic aspect to contract (just as in primitive capitalism the accumula-
tion of capital tended to expand in the hands of its owners), then,
perhaps, mixed capitalism, like primitive capitalism, contains the
seeds of its own destruction.
In that case, our only choice is the capitalist revolution. Before
we try to show that in that direction lies our salvation as a free so-
ciety, we will advance some reasons for thinking that our mixed
economy cannot solve its problem of inflation and full employ-
ment.
MIXED CAPITALISM’S INSOLUBLE PROBLEM: INFLATION
Inflation is a natural and necessary process in an economy that is
capitalist in its mode of production and laboristic in its form of
distribution. Over 70 percent of the wealth produced is distributed
to labor, but over 90 percent of that wealth is produced, not by
labor, but by capital instruments. Quite apart from the manifest
injustice of this imbalance, it is in this ulcerous gap that the spiral
of inflation breeds.
The ulcer cannot be healed without reversing the policies of
full employment and laboristic distribution, upon which any at-
tempt to perpetuate our mixed economy must rely. Upon them
depends the widely diffused purchasing power that produces a bal-
ance between mass production and mass consumption. They are
the shot in the arm that keeps our mixed economy functioning. It
is precisely that shot in the arm which also produces the disease of
inflation––a chronic and progressive disease which cannot be pre-
vented without endangering the health of mixed capitalism.
143
When our fixed national policy of full employment collides
with the irresistible moving force of technological progress, some-
thing must give. That something is the virtue of the monetary sys-
tem––its stable value. The result is inflation. The relation between
inflation, as it occurs in our mixed economy, and the policy of full
employment can be concretely illustrated in the following manner.
The civilian labor force at the present time is approximately
66,000,000 workers. There are various estimates of the current rate
of “productivity increase,” i.e., the rate of increase in output in
terms of man-hours of input. The most conservative is about 3
percent per year for the economy as a whole. Assuming for the
economy an overall productivity increase of 3 percent per year,
1,980,000 workers each year become technologically disemployed
(at any given level of production). Estimates of the number of new
entrants into the labor market each year also vary, mainly because
of the relatively incalculable factor of the increasing number of
young and middle-age wives, even mothers of school-age children,
who are entering the labor market. A median of the various esti-
mates would be a net increase of 800,000 workers in the labor
force each year, with the tendency to increase rather than decrease.
To comply with its policy of full employment, which, under a
laboristic form of distribution, is essential to widely diffused pur-
chasing power, our mixed economy must employ each year, under
conditions of higher output with progressively less labor input
needed, an additional 2,780,000 workers. The best thinking about
the present state of the “increasing productiveness of capital” (as it
should be called) holds that the newest developments in automa-
tion in the years immediately ahead will technologically disemploy
workers at a rate substantially exceeding 3 percent a year.62 For pre-
sent purposes, however, let us face the problem of how our mixed
62 See, for example, The Scientific-Industrial Revolution, a study published in 1957 by
the New York investment banking house of Model, Roland & Stone; and also
the report of the hearings before the Subcommittee on Economic Stabilization
of the Joint Economic Committee, on Automation and Technological Change (1955)
and on Instrumentation and Automation (1956).
144
economy can provide full employment for an additional 2,780,000
workers a year in an industrial system that turns out an ever in-
creasing amount of wealth with a constantly diminishing use of
labor.
One solution of this problem would be for the government to
assign a quota of increased employment to each business firm each
year, and to order each firm to employ fully, at prevailing or in-
creased rates of pay, the additional number of workers through
increasing their output, and a t the same time to make all reasonable
efforts to utilize the most productive machinery available. Only a
totalitarian state could enforce such measures. In addition, if they were
carried out by coercion, their effect would be extremely deflation-
ary; for they would result in staggering increases in output without
regard to the effect on business costs.
Absurd as the solution just proposed may be as a theoretically
possible means of implementing a policy of full employment, since
it is totally impracticable in a free society, it nevertheless helps to
illustrate why the methods we must use to implement our policy of
full employment are necessarily inflationary.
In order to maintain as much freedom as possible in our econ-
omy and still bring about full employment, it is necessary for us
continuously to raise output in a constantly accelerating orgy of
production, yet without rigid government control of wages, prices
or methods of production. But in the face of the increasing pro-
ductiveness of our capital, there is no way of constantly raising
output to a level commensurate with full employment, while leav-
ing the economic participants relatively free, except by constantly
increasing our artificial stimulation of purchasing power.
We have ceased to think of many of these stimulants in con-
nection with the problem of providing full employment, but that is
one of the principal ways they function. A mere enumeration of
some of the devices now in use to overstimulate purchasing power
will indicate how far we have gone in this direction. It will also
show how radical our future steps must become to keep pace with
the relentless advance in the increasing productivity of capital. The
145
following are some of our more potent stimulants to purchasing
power.
1. Constant union pressure upon wage levels, supported by extensive
grants of the countervailing power of government. Largely as a result
of these forces, wages are raised well above their competi-
tive levels.
2. Defense spending, which now amounts to about 40 billion dollars a
year. While spending on defense increases production––and
therefore employment––it satisfies no consumer desires.
The defense products, therefore, do not absorb any of the
purchasing power arising out of their production, thus leav-
ing this purchasing power to be used in the further stimula-
tion of production, and therefore of employment in other
industries.
3. A governmentally encouraged system of easy construction mortgage
credit, giving a vast stimulation to the high-employment building
trades. At the present time there is outstanding some 103
billion dollars in housing mortgage credit, 36 billion dollars
in multi-family and commercial mortgage credit, and
around 10 billion dollars in farm mortgage credit.
4. A governmentally encouraged system of easy consumer credit for dura-
ble goods, of which some 42 billion dollars is now outstanding.
5. Governmental subsidization of farm production, and therefore of farm
employment, with about 8 billion dollars of farm surpluses in govern-
ment hands today, notwithstanding gifts or sales below cost of vast
quantities of these stores in recent years.
6. Defense stock-piling of minerals and strategic materials, with the effect
of stimulating production and employment in the mining and process-
ing industries. About 8 billion dollars of such materials are
now on hand and, notwithstanding the passing of the stra-
tegic goals, great pressure is building up to continue these
programs.
146
7. Foreign aid subsidies, frequently taking the form of credits for pur-
chase of goods in the United States. Over 40 billion dollars of
such subsidies have been granted since 1948.
8. The “emergency facility” rapid amortization program, heavily used
during World War II and initiated again after the outbreak of hos-
tilities in Korea in 1950. Between November, 1950, and June,
1957, 21,946 certificates of necessity have been granted by
the Office of Defense Mobilization upon 38.3 billion dol-
lars of new construction, of which 23.1 billion dollars has
been certified for rapid write-off against corporate income
taxes. This is, in its economic effect, an aggregate of 23.1
billion dollars of governmental interest-free loans for the
purpose of stimulating the construction of over 38 billion
dollars of new plants and equipment.
9. The steady expansion in the number of civilian employees of federal,
state, and local governments. From 1949 to 1957, the aggregate
number of governmental employees rose from 5,856,000 to
7,388,000. Of these, nearly 2,400,000 were civilian employ-
ees of the federal government.
10. Social Security payments in excess of those actuarially supportable by
the social security fund. There are many actuaries who believe
that the social security fund is but a fraction of liabilities a l-
ready accrued against it. If so, current social security pay-
ments may be considered as partly, if not largely, over-
stimulation of consumer demand in excess of the payments
which would be actuarially proper on the basis of the re-
serves against such liabilities. In effect, this would be sim-
ply a rapidly increasing but unrecorded national debt cur-
rently incurred to support mass purchasing power.
11. The very persistence of the federal government’s debt in the face of un-
precedented economic prosperity. This represents nothing but the
overstimulation of consumer purchasing power. Rather
than reduce our debt during an era of prosperity, the best
we have been able to do is to prevent it from increasing
beyond 275 billion dollars. The failure of the government
147
to reduce its debt during the decade since the end of World
War II without question reflects an unwillingness to incur
the shrinkage in consumer purchasing power which such
debt retirement would cause.
Each year, as it becomes more and more difficult to maintain
full employment in an economy in which the output of wealth is
expanded by the constantly higher productiveness of capital, the
orgy of production must be stimulated to ever higher peaks. The
pace of technological advance itself accelerates the process.
The stimulation of production by the creation––through credit,
wage raises, etc.––of sufficient purchasing power in excess of that
generated through the normal distribution of wealth is now the
accepted policy of both political parties in the United States. Both
have espoused the national policy of full employment as formu-
lated by the Full Employment Act of 1946.
Under this policy, progressive and increasing inflation is a
normal and necessary result of the overstimulation of production
through constantly increasing mass purchasing power.63 The pro-
ductive system is capable of expanding its output to untold lim-
its—to levels not now contemplated in our wildest dreams––
provided the purchasing power, the fuel of this mighty engine, is
applied in ever increasing quantities. But the system needs a con-
stantly diminishing proportion of labor, through whose ranks the
63 Lord Beveridge, who, through his book Full Employment in a Free Society, New
York, 1945, was one of the intellectual pioneers of laboristic distribution, in a
speech on October 20, 1956, in London, noted that one of the disastrous results
of simultaneous attempts to have both full employment and a free society is inflation.
Lord Beveridge said: “Most of my working life was spent in University service.
When I left that service to become a politician in 1945, I was able to take with
me for superannuation enough thousand pounds to feel fairly happy for my fu-
ture. Now each of those pounds is worth about 6s. 8d. Like many other healthy
people in the seventies I am in danger of living longer than I can afford to live.
Our plans for useful old age are all going hay-wire. The underlying reason for
that is the claim of each industry to fix its own money wages by sovereign ac-
tion. Under full employment, that is leading to destruction of the value of
money, and is spreading wide-spread poverty among all who are trying to live on
savings or fixed pensions.”
148
mass purchasing power must be diffused by full employment. Out
of these conflicting tendencies is born the paradox that our econ-
omy, characterized by the greatest assembly of labor-eliminating
machines and devices on earth, has the highest proportion ever
reached of both men and women engaged in paid employments. A
constantly increasing proportion of the population must enter the
labor market if the laboristic distribution of wealth is to keep pace
with the increasing productiveness of capital.
Another solution of the problem has been proposed. It is of-
fered as a means of providing full employment through the pres-
sure of generating excessive quantities of purchasing power, while at
the same time preventing inflation. It is strongly advocated by some of
our most prominent labor leaders and by many political exponents
of the theory of “full employment without inflation.”
This theory proposes the observance by business––voluntarily,
if possible; otherwise involuntarily, under government coercion––
of two policies. One is a policy of limiting wage increases to so-
called productivity increases. The other is a policy, to be pursued
by business, of abstaining from raising prices in response to in-
creases in wages where such increases are limited to “productivity
increases.”64
With regard to the second of these policies, we should note
first that it calls upon business to abandon the competitive setting
of prices, just as our mixed economy has long since abandoned, or
suppressed, the competitive setting of wages. Regardless of the
competitive forces at work in the market, the application of the
second policy would arrest the prices of products and services,
while the application of the first would automatically increase the
wages of labor at a rate commensurate with the increasing produc-
tiveness of capital instruments.
64 For a clear statement of these two policies, see Philip Murray’s Annual Report
for 1952, reprinted in the Supplement to The People Shall Judge, Chicago, 1956:
278-294. For what closely resembles an affirmation of them, see President Ei-
senhower’s State of the Union message delivered to Congress, January, 1957.
149
We must look deeper, however, to see the ultimate significance
of the theory of full employment without inflation.
As we have already noted, one essential right of private prop-
erty in an instrument of production is the right to receive the
wealth produced by that instrument, i.e., a return proportionate to
the value of the contribution it makes to the production of wealth.
The only impartial determination of the value of that contribution
is one made through the operation of supply and demand under
conditions of free competition. We estimate that the productive
power of capital instruments accounts for over 90 percent of the
wealth produced, but that over 70 percent of that wealth is distrib-
uted to labor in accordance with our mixed economy’s partly labor-
istic and partly capitalistic form of distribution.65 This means that
one of the most essential rights of private property in capital has
already been greatly attenuated. It also means that effective and
highly concentrated ownership of capital in about 5 percent of the
households of our economy is incompatible with the production of
some 90 percent of the wealth by capital instruments.
Now the proposal by advocates of “full employment without
inflation,” translated into language which recognizes that increased
“productivity” is the increased economic productivity of capital,
comes to this: that wages should be allowed to increase in propor-
tion to the increase in the wealth produced by capital. In point of
fact, these “productivity increases” are increases in output that re-
sult from additional investment in capital instruments. Hence the
essence of the proposal is that a large portion, if not all, of the in-
creased wealth produced by the new or improved capital instru-
ments should be passed on to the workers employed in industry.
The ultimate meaning of the theory of full employment with-
out inflation is, therefore, that future capital formation should be
subject to a process of socialization; for it is only through govern-
ment regulation or through the countervailing power of govern-
ment in support of organized labor that such an unjust distribution
65 See pp. 40-43, supra, and also the Appendix, pp. 256-264, infra.
150
of wealth can be effected. If technological advance is not arrested,
and if labor should continue to receive a larger and larger portion
of the wealth produced by newly formed capital, then the rate of
socialization––or, what is the same, the degree of attenuation of
the right of private property in capital to receive a full return on
what such property earns––will conform to the rate of technologi-
cal progress.
Here, then, is the perilous dilemma that confronts our mixed
capitalist economy.
On the one hand, to continue to carry out the policy of full
employment without controlling prices or otherwise rigidly regulat-
ing the economy would be to allow inflation to reach the point
where public confidence in the monetary system is gravely weak-
ened. When that happens, controls equivalent to full public owner-
ship of capital by the state will most certainly ensue.
On the other hand, to adopt the theory of full employment
without inflation is to initiate at once a process of further socializa-
tion and to project it at a rate which will be governed by the rate of
technological progress. This, too, can only end in the complete so-
cialization of our economy.
In either case, our mixed economy seems to be sowing the
seeds of its own destruction. Even if we wished to perpetuate our
system of mixed capitalism instead of dissolving its mixture in fa-
vor of Capitalism, we almost certainly would not be able to do so.
When its inherent and incurable weakness becomes fully apparent
to us, we may realize that, if we wish to avoid the complete social-
ist revolution of State capitalism, a capitalist counterrevolution is
our only choice.
OUR ONLY CHOICE –– CAPITALISM
151
It is one thing to have no choice because of inexorable necessities,
and quite another to have only one choice when one thing is clearly
seen to be the best means to the end we have in view.
We are under no necessity to choose the path of the capitalist
revolution. Nothing compels us to make every feasible effort to
establish a capitalist economy based on a widely diffused private
ownership of capital, instead of allowing the creeping socialist
revolution to push us further and further in the direction of a capi-
talist economy based on the public ownership of capital and the
complete control by the State of the production, distribution, and
consumption of wealth.
Only when the organization of an economy is seen by us as
something which by its justice or injustice either serves or defeats
the ends of a free society and a good human life for all men, does
Capitalism, as opposed to State capitalism, become our only
choice. If we were not devoted to the institutions of political de-
mocracy, because through their intrinsic justice they afford all men
the freedom and dignity essential to the pursuit of happiness, if we
were not deeply imbued with the democratic faith in human equal-
ity, if we did not firmly believe that equality of opportunity in a
truly classless as well as free society held out the promise of the
fullest development of the potentialities of the human spirit––if
these things did not constitute the ideal goal of our aspirations, we
would be under no necessity to undertake the capitalist revolution.
But given these ends, we have no other choice.
That being the case, we should not look upon the capitalist
revolution as something forced upon us by the instability of our
mixed economy and by the grave risks we would incur of ultimate
consequences that we abhor, should we try to perpetuate it. Even if
it were possible to perpetuate mixed capitalism in its present condi-
tion, with no more socialization and no greater concentration of
political and economic power in the hands of government than
now exists, we ought still elect to undo the mixture and try to cre-
ate Capitalism. The obligation expressed in that word “ought” is
both one of justice and one of prudence––one of justice insofar as
152
Capitalism represents a justly organized economy as mixed capital-
ism does not, one of prudence insofar as Capitalism is clearly the
better economic means to the political and human goods that con-
stitute our ideal goal.
We need not argue the case for Capitalism on the basis of eco-
nomic justice. That has already been sufficiently done in Chapter
Five. What must be done is to show that Capitalism, of the various
forms that an industrial economy can take, is the economic coun-
terpart of political democracy and that, together with political de-
mocracy, it is the best means to the ideal of a classless society of
free and equal men whose freedom and equality gives them all the
opportunity for a truly human life.
However, a brief summary of the intrinsic justice of Capitalism
is necessary for the purpose of showing how such justice creates an
economic democracy that is the counterpart of political democracy,
and how together they serve the cause of freedom and human
happiness.
Of all forms of government, democracy is the most just or the
only perfectly just constitution of a political society. Tyranny en-
slaves men. Despotism, even when benevolent, degrades them to
the level of children; for though it paternalistically takes care of
them, it allows them no voice in their own government. Only con-
stitutional or republican government grants men the political status
of citizenship through which, with suffrage, they can participate in
self-government. But some republics are constituted as oligarchies.
These violate the natural right of all men to be citizens by confer-
ring on the few, and refusing to the rest, the political liberty to
which they are all equally entitled. Only the democratic constitu-
tion of a republic, with its basic principle of universal equal suf-
frage, grants all men citizenship, and so gives all of them the politi-
cal liberty that comes from having a share in the sovereignty and
from being able thereby to participate in self-government. Hence
democracy is the only perfectly just form of government.
In like manner, Capitalism is the only perfectly just form of an
industrial economy. By its preservation of private property in capi-
153
tal as the chief means whereby men can, in an industrial economy,
participate in the production and distribution of wealth; by its prin-
ciple of proportioning distributive shares of the wealth produced
on the basis of the contributions made to its production, as meas-
ured impartially by supply and demand in a freely competitive mar-
ket; by its limitation of undue concentrations in the ownership of
capital; and by its correlative effort to diffuse that ownership as
widely as possible among the persons or families in the economy,
Capitalism embodies all the principles of justice with regard to the
distribution of wealth and protects the right of every man to sub-
sistence, and its inseparable right to private property as a means of
earning that subsistence. A purely capitalistic distribution of wealth
in a highly productive capitalist economy gives full effect to these
basic rights.
Thus it is clear that Capitalism will produce economic democ-
racy or the counterpart in the economic order of democracy in the
political order. As democracy is a polity in which it is possible for
all men to participate as citizens, so Capitalism is an economy in
which it is possible for all men to participate as capitalists. As their
participation in government through the suffrage of citizenship
gives them political liberty, so their participation in the production
of wealth through the ownership of capital will give them eco-
nomic freedom.
Furthermore, it is in respect of their all being citizens alike that
men enjoy political equality. They are not divided into a ruling and
a subject class. So it is in respect of all having alike the opportunity
to participate in production as capitalists that men will enjoy eco-
nomic equality. They will not be divided into an owning and a la-
boring class (i.e., capitalists and proletariat). Hence the establish-
ment of Capitalism as the economic substructure of democracy will
produce for the first time in history the ideal classless society in
which the whole mass of humankind will constitute a single class––
one that is truly privileged and justly so.66
66 It is often said that the institution of private property provides the economic
basis for democracy. That is not the case; or rather, it is a misleading half-truth.
154
We just referred to Capitalism as providing the requisite eco-
nomic substructure for democracy. That statement is intended to
convey not only the subordination of the economic to the political
order as a whole, but also the necessity of economic freedom for
the protection and vitality of political liberty.
The second point needs further comment. We have pointed
out several times the reluctance or refusal of our ancestors to ex-
tend the franchise to workingmen, or to grant equal suffrage to
propertied men of leisure and to those who were dependent for
their subsistence on toil and had to work twelve hours a day or
more from childhood to the grave. One reason they gave for this,
as expressed by John Adams and Alexander Hamilton, was that no
man who was dependent for his subsistence on the arbitrary will of
others (as propertyless laborers were in those days) had the eco-
nomic independence requisite for citizenship and the use of politi-
cal liberty.
There were other reasons, too. It was felt that since the proper-
tied and the propertyless did not belong to the same economic
class, neither should they belong to the same political class. Fur-
thermore, it was thought that the owners of property, by reason of
their property, had more at stake than the propertyless workers;
and in a sense they did. This led to the maxim that the country
should be run by those who owned it. Finally, John Stuart Mill
pointed out, as Aristotle had before him, that the trouble with
making workingmen citizens is that they had neither the education
to fit them for the duties of citizenship nor the leisure in which to
The institution of private property may be necessary for economic freedom, but
by itself it is hardly sufficient for the diffusion of such freedom among all who
should be citizens in a democracy. In primitive capitalism, the small capitalist
class, in whose hands the private ownership of capital was concentrated, were
among the most strenuous and obstinate opponents of all efforts to move to-
ward political democracy by extensions of the franchise to the nonpropertied
working masses. Hence it is Capitalism––the diffused ownership of capital, not
just the private ownership of it––that creates the economic substructure appro-
priate to democracy.
155
exercise citizenship by an active participation in government. As a
simple matter of fact, this was as true when Mill wrote his essay on
Representative Government in 1863 as it was when Aristotle wrote the
Politics in the fourth century B.C.
The good sense in all of this would seem to point to the con-
clusion that the universal ownership by individuals of wealth-
producing and income-bearing property, which is capital in an in-
dustrial economy, is needed as the economic basis for the univer-
sal possession of political rights and privileges which come with
citizenship in a republic. Nevertheless, it may be argued that it is
not necessary for all men to be capitalists in order for them to be
made citizens, to be trusted with political liberty, or to be relied on
to take an active and responsible interest in public affairs because
they have a serious stake in the results of self-government.
In support of such objection, it may be argued that we have
universal suffrage now and that it is working reasonably well even
though under our mixed capitalism only a relatively small number
of citizens are also capitalists in any significant sense of that term.
It is working well, it may be contended, because the spread of uni-
versal public schooling with the extension of the franchise until
one has become as universal as the other, has provided the educa-
tion prerequisite for citizenship. That, together with the steady re-
duction in the hours of work which industrial production has
made possible and which organized labor and government regula-
tions have made actual for the working masses, provides them not
only with the training for political life but with ample opportunity,
in the time that has been freed for leisure, to participate actively in
the affairs of government.
All this has been done in support of democracy by our mixed
capitalist economy and without making all men capitalists in order
to enable them to be good citizens. Why, then, is Capitalism re-
quired as the economic substructure for democracy?
The answer is to be found in two considerations. Neither has
to do with education or time for leisure; for it must be admitted
156
that these prerequisites of citizenship can be provided without
making all men capitalists. But these are not the only prerequisites.
One of the additional considerations is the kind of economic
independence which can be had in a capitalist economy only by
being a capitalist. In our mixed economy, those who are neither
capitalists nor members of labor unions do not gain their subsis-
tence without dependence on the arbitrary will of other men. And
those who enjoy such economic security and independence as they
have through the power of organized labor, together with the
power of government in support of organized labor, do not have
their economic security and independence in function of their
own property, but only by a struggle for power in the war of class
against class.
Even if every labor union were organized and operated in the
image of democracy, its members would still not be as economi-
cally free as men who had a grasp on their livelihood as independ-
ent individuals rather than as members of a group, and had it as a
matter of personal right rather than as a matter of organized
might. Since the power of labor unions depends upon the coun-
tervailing power of government, to have a grasp on one’s liveli-
hood through organized might is to be dependent for it on the
power of government. This is the second of the additional consid-
erations mentioned above.
Both of these considerations entered into Thomas Jefferson’s
argument that an agrarian, as opposed to an industrial, economy
provided the economic basis for republican government. He pic-
tured an agrarian economy as one in which the great majority of
families obtained their subsistence from farms they owned and
worked, instead of being dependent on wages and employers as
were the families of the workers in the manufacturing cities that
were just beginning to arise. The land-owning farmer had the kind
of economic independence which, according to Jefferson, was the
ideal basis for citizenship and for a vigorous as well as virtuous use
of political liberty.
157
Such men were not beholden to government for their subsis-
tence or their independence. Their hold on both was integral to
their ownership of income-bearing property. Consequently, they
were in a position to participate in government as independent
persons. They did not seek to endow government with extraordi-
nary powers in order to give them freedom. On the contrary, be-
cause they had their freedom in their own property and in their
citizenship, they sought to limit the powers of government to such
as were necessary to protect their property and safeguard their
rights as citizens.
What Jefferson said in terms of a laborist agrarian economy,
what Aristotle had said before him in terms of a similar economy,
holds true of a capitalist industrial economy. We need only trans-
pose the terms. In place of the slave-owning aristocrat who was the
ideal citizen in Aristotle’s day, or in place of the land-owning
farmer who was the ideal citizen in Jefferson’s day, we need only
substitute the capital-owning common man as the ideal citizen in our
own day. In all three cases, such men have the kind of independ-
ence that is needed for self-government; and since they have their
economic and political freedom by right, not by might, they will try
to limit the powers of government to those necessary for the pro-
tection of their rights.
But while Capitalism will thus serve democracy, and while to-
gether they will create an economically and politically classless so-
ciety, that is not the ultimate contribution which Capitalism can
make to human life. Under Capitalism, as the participation of men
in the production of wealth through the employment of their labor
diminishes, their participation through their ownership of capital
will increase. Under Capitalism, men will be saved the waste in-
volved in all the unnecessary forms of toil that our present mixed
economy imposes.
It requires no special insight to see that labor spent in the pro-
duction of agricultural and industrial surpluses is wasted toil; nor to
understand the mystery of why, as hours are shortened under the
pressure of organized labor, increasing numbers of workers hold
158
two and three jobs and an increasing number of married women
with growing children enter the labor market. A laboristic distribu-
tion of wealth requires labor, whether or not it is needed for the
production of desired wealth. Only Capitalism invites all men to go
beyond the production of wealth to what is essential to their hap-
piness once their subsistence is assured––engagement in the liberal
pursuits of leisure which produce the goods of civilization and of
the human spirit.
In this respect Capitalism, as a justly organized industrial econ-
omy, has a marked advantage over the most justly organized labor-
ist economy of which the past can boast. In a just laborist econ-
omy, where no man was a slave, all men had to spend most of their
life and energy in toil for subsistence. No man enjoyed the leisure
of purely liberal work.
In the laborist economy that was built on the grievous injustice
of chattel slavery, some men––the members of the leisure class––
were able “to live well by engaging,” as Aristotle said, “in philoso-
phy and politics,” or, in other words, by spending most of their life
and energy in purely liberal work productive of the goods of civili-
zation: the liberal arts and sciences, the institutions of the state and
of religion.
Any capitalist economy, by its very nature as a system of indus-
trial production, can be the most potent source of time for leisure
work that the world has ever seen. The possibility of leisure for all
men is equally present in a State capitalist economy, such as that of
Soviet Russia, and in a mixed capitalist economy, such as ours. But
both State capitalism and mixed capitalism involve a laboristic dis-
tribution of wealth which makes both of them erect false ideals
about human work for subsistence. The liability of all to labor is
one of the tenets of State capitalism. The goal of full employment
is a central objective in the scheme of mixed capitalism. Neither of
these is a sound ideal according to the principles of Capitalism.
The ultimate goal of Capitalism is not full employment on the
level of subsistence work but rather the fullest employment of
one’s time in leisure work. Far from its being morally sound for all
159
men to be liable to labor, the moral truth is rather that all men are
obligated to spend as much time as they can in liberal pursuits.
And if it is possible for them to spend most of their time in liberal
activities, because they obtain a viable income from the productive
use of their property in capital, there is nothing immoral about
their not spending any time or energy in doing subsistence work,
especially that which is mechanical in quality. Capitalists, of course,
must devote time and effort in the management and husbanding of
their property, but this is an activity that is at least liberal in quality.
When we refer to liberal pursuits, we have two things in mind.
One is purely liberal work of the sort that is exemplified in the ac-
tivities of statesmen, philosophers, scientists, artists, teachers, etc.
The other is the kind of work that is done by technicians and man-
agers who, even though they are engaged in producing wealth
rather than the goods of civilization, are nevertheless performing
activities which are liberal in quality though employed in the pro-
duction of subsistence.
Men who enjoy such activity, as compared with philosophy,
pure science, the fine arts, and teaching, may have a lower aim so
far as an absolute order of goods is concerned. But so far as the
human quality of the work is concerned, they are engaged in crea-
tive activity that has all the essential characteristics of leisure.
In addition, those who are engaged in the management of
large-scale industrial enterprises are, within their own corporations,
performing the quasi-political functions of legislation, adjudication,
and administration. And in the relation of private corporations to
one another and to the agencies of government, the managers of
business and industry, like the heads of private universities, hospi-
tals, and foundations, should function as statesmen.
With this important qualification in mind, it should now be
possible to say, without misunderstanding, that the ultimate aim of
Capitalism, beyond the establishment of economic justice and
freedom, is the enjoyment of leisure by all men in the major por-
tion of their life’s time. Thus it aims to do for all men what a primi-
tive laborist economy could do for none, and what a civilized la-
160
borist economy based on slavery succeeded in doing only for the
few. By substituting machines for slaves, under conditions of ad-
vanced industrial production, both State capitalism and mixed capi-
talism are in a position to do for all men what the slave societies of
the past did for the few. But because of their fundamental errors
and confusions about the disposition of capital and labor in the
production and distribution of wealth, they do not clearly and con-
sistently aim at this result. On the contrary, they often tend in the
opposite direction. Only Capitalism, by the soundness and consis-
tency of its principles, aims at the right human result––the good
life for all men.
161
8 THE THEORY OF CAPITALISM
THE ECONOMICS OF CAPITALISM
We think it may be useful to summarize the theory of Capitalism,
in this concluding chapter on the idea of the capitalist revolution,
before we turn to the practical program by which it can be accom-
plished. That theory involves more than the economics of the pro-
duction and distribution of wealth. It involves basic considerations
of political economy, concerning government’s role in relation to
the economy as a whole. It also involves some fundamental ethical
judgments about wealth in relation to more important goods, and
about subsistence work in relation to more important activities.
The economics of Capitalism has been sufficiently discussed in
the preceding pages to require only the briefest summary here. The
following points are its essential elements:
1. The industrial production of wealth, in which capital is re-
sponsible for the major portion of the wealth produced, and
labor for only a small fraction of it.
2. The private ownership of capital, together with the widest
possible diffusion of such ownership among the households
of the economy.
162
3. The production of wealth by the voluntary association and
cooperation of private owners of the factors of production
(i.e., private owners of labor power and private owners of
capital) in which most of the persons involved will function
as capitalists as well as workers.
4. The distribution of the wealth produced in accordance with
the property rights of the persons engaged in its production,
with the extent of the distributive shares accorded the various
participants, determined by the extent of their contribution as
that is evaluated through supply and demand under condi-
tions of free competition.
5. The progressive reduction of the labor force (i.e., the number
engaged in mechanical labor) with the progressive automation
of industrial production; and a steady increase in the em-
ployment of men in leisure work, or in subsistence work that
is not mechanical in quality.
6. The maintenance of a generally high standard of living by
means of earned incomes consisting of wages established un-
der freely competitive conditions and the earnings of capital
shares (the latter being especially important in those cases in
which competitively set wages do not constitute a viable in-
come).
7. The creation of widely diffused mass purchasing power as a
means of supporting mass production, without an artificial
expansion of production for the mere sake of providing em-
ployment, whether or not the wealth produced is desired.
8. The promotion and adoption of every technological advance
that will result in a more efficient industrial production of
wealth, accompanied by a progressive diminution in the
amount of subsistence work needed for its production.
Certain widely prevalent errors have prevented, and may still
prevent, those who are concerned with the economic problems of
our society from understanding the theory of Capitalism as out-
lined above. It may be therapeutic to call attention to the most in-
sidious of these fallacies in current economic thought, which are to
163
be found not only in the writings of avowed socialists but also in
the writings of the leading apologists for our present mixed capital-
ism. They can be briefly summarized as follows:
1. The failure to recognize capital instruments as active produc-
ers of wealth in the same sense that men doing subsistence
work are active producers of wealth.
2. The consequent false distinction between being an active par-
ticipant in the production of wealth through one’s own labor
and being a passive participant in its production through
one’s capital.
3. The further consequent notion that income derived from the
productive use of capital is not earned in the same sense as is
income derived from the productive use of labor power, to-
gether with the notion that property in capital, being passive,
should not be accorded the same rights as property in labor.
4. The illusion that mechanical labor becomes increasingly pro-
ductive in proportion as the whole industrial economy be-
comes increasingly productive through the introduction of
more and more efficient capital instruments, together with a
consequent blindness to the fact that mechanical labor in an
advanced industrial economy such as ours produces a very
small portion of our wealth (probably 10 percent or less).
5. The failure to realize that in our present economy property
rights in capital have been substantially eroded, together with
self-deception in the belief that our economy respects the
rights of private property in capital.
6. The failure to recognize that diffusion of economic power is
impossible without diffusion of private ownership of capital
and without full respect for the rights of such ownership, to-
gether with the failure to see that effective private ownership
of capital, widely diffused, is the only institution in a free so-
ciety capable of containing and limiting the necessarily cen-
tralized political power of modern governments.
164
7. Recognition of the importance of effective and adequate capi-
tal formation, without recognition of the necessity of a pro-
gressively broader diffusion of its private ownership.
8. Blindness to the fact that a massive concentration of capital
property in a minute proportion of the households in an in-
dustrial economy bars the way to an effective participation by
all households in the production of wealth, together with
consequent blindness to the fact that the economic security
thus achieved by a few households is destructive of economic
security for the rest.
9. The failure to recognize that it is the maldistribution of par-
ticipation in production, through excessive concentration in
the ownership of capital, that is the basic cause of the eco-
nomic dislocations or periodic “depressions” in an industrial
economy based on private property in capital and labor.
10. The mistaken belief that full employment and a laboristic dis-
tribution of wealth are indispensable to the creation of a
widely diffused purchasing power adequate for the consump-
tion of the wealth an industrial society is able to produce, and
which is therefore necessary to prevent “depressions.”
11. The false notion that labor-saving devices create employment;
i.e., the fallacy of supposing that technological advances are
compatible with a policy of full employment in subsistence
work, which often takes the form of concealing their incom-
patibility by an orgy of artificially stimulated overproduction.
12. Self-deception with regard to the fact that corporate managers
or executives are subsistence workers in exactly the same
sense as are all other employees of industrial corporations,
differing from these others only in the degree of importance
and creativeness of their work, together with the mistaken be-
lief that the corporate managers or executives are the “real
capitalists” in our society, in contradistinction to the “mere
owners” of the capital that the corporation employs.
The correction or elimination of these errors and fallacies
would open the door to a sound understanding of the economics
165
of Capitalism. That, in fact, is almost impossible as long as these
currently prevalent mistakes persist.
THE POLITICS OF CAPITALISM
As a political economy, Capitalism is not to be confused with the
so-called laissez-faire system of an absolutely self-regulating market.
It does not rest on the utterly mistaken belief that if only govern-
ment will keep its hands completely off the economy, the opera-
tion of natural economic laws will result in economic prosperity,
general economic welfare, and justice, as well as freedom, for all.
As with regard to the economics of Capitalism, so with regard
to the politics of Capitalism, a number of widely held beliefs pre-
vent the truth from being seen. The most obfuscating of these be-
liefs relate to the economic function of competition. It is believed,
for example, that free competition uninhibited by governmental
regulation or interference will function as an automatic regulator of
economic activity. It is also believed that free competition will pro-
vide full employment and that it will automatically sustain itself.
The repeated and widespread demonstrations that competition
does not provide full employment, and that it normally and natu-
rally tends to destroy itself, should by now have discredited these
doctrinaire laissez-faire beliefs. But unfortunately they still persist in
certain quarters. It is unfortunate also that so much of the virtue
claimed in the past for free competition was based on the illusion
that it would provide full employment and that it would perpetuate
itself because, as a consequence, when these beliefs are discredited,
the true functions of free competition are often discredited with
them.67
67 A thorough analysis of the functions of free competition will be presented in
Capitalism. In a brief summary of that analysis, we would like to emphasize the
following points: that free competition in all the markets of the economy (other
than those in the field of the technically unavoidable public utilities) will deter-
mine for the common good of the society (a) what items of wealth will be pro-
166
As a political economy, Capitalism recognizes that free compe-
tition does not and cannot provide full employment, and further,
that full employment itself is an undesirable objective and that the
means of achieving it are equally undesirable. Insisting that, in the
absence of freely competitive markets whereby economic values
can be objectively and impartially determined, the whole concep-
tion of a just economy becomes hollow, Capitalism also recognizes
that the most assiduous efforts of government to regulate the
economy are required to preserve free competition in all markets
against the inherent propensity of free competition to destroy it-
self. Under Capitalism, therefore, the government has the obliga-
tion to maintain free competition in all the markets of the econ-
omy.
Far from being a system of laissez-faire, Capitalism is a political
economy in which the maximum freedom of the participants in
economic activity is achieved by government regulation consistent
with the economic principles of Capitalism and, especially, with its princi-
ples of justice. The absence of proper economic regulations can no
more create a free economy than the absence of social regulations
can create a free society.
It is the duty of government to promote Capitalism by giving
the fullest protection to private property, not only property in con-
sumer goods but also and principally property in the instruments
of production, whether capital or labor power. In the case of prop-
erty in capital instruments, the aim of government should be to
make such property effective as a source of earned income. To do
this, it must protect the rights of capitalists to receive the full re-
duced and in what quantities; (b) the technological manner of their production;
(c) the identity of the producers, i.e., the owners of labor and the owners of capi-
tal; (d) when items of wealth shall be produced and where; (e) the value of the
contribution of each participant in production; and (f) the value of goods and
services in all stages of production and at all times following the completion of
their production.
167
turn from the wealth produced by the shares of capital that they
own. In addition, government should surround the economic
status of the capitalist as stockholder with legal protections and
privileges analogous to those it has conferred on the political status
of the citizen, and for an analogous reason; namely, in order to
make the capitalist, like the citizen, a man who can exert legal
power in the control of his own affairs.
Where competition is the instrument of just evaluation, and
hence of justice in the distribution of wealth, monopoly is an in-
strument of power whereby some men can impose their arbitrary
will on others. Furthermore, a diffused ownership of capital prop-
erty would thrive on a truly competitive system, whereas monopoly
in all its forms facilitates every tendency toward concentrated own-
ership of capital. Our present antitrust laws are conceptually inade-
quate to foster fee competition and to prevent all forms of mo-
nopoly.
In addition to giving full protection to the rights of private
property and to safeguarding free competition against its own in-
herent tendencies toward monopoly, government should positively
promote Capitalism by regulations designed to provide every
household with the opportunity to contribute to production, either
through the ownership of capital or through the ownership of la-
bor, or through both, in ways that will justly enable each household
to earn a viable distributive share of the wealth produced.
Government is under an obligation to make it possible at all
times for each and every consumer unit or household to partici-
pate in the production of wealth to an extent sufficient for earning
a viable income. If a capitalistic form of distribution is observed,
this of necessity requires that, since the wealth is largely produced
by capital, it must also be largely distributed in the form of returns
to the owners of capital. As the burden of production shifts from
labor to capital, an increasing number of the households in the
economy must, therefore, become owners of capital.
There will always be millions of workers employed in an indus-
trial economy. Nevertheless, if the contribution of an individual
168
household toward the production of wealth is exclusively by labor
and if, when objectively and justly evaluated through free competi-
tion, what such labor earns is less than sufficient to provide a de-
cent standard of living for that household, then the opportunity
must be given it to enlarge its participation in production through
becoming an owner of capital.
Under mixed capitalism, with its unjust laboristic form of dis-
tribution, our government pursues the objective of general eco-
nomic welfare by a policy of full employment. Under Capitalism,
with a just capitalistic form of distribution, the government would
pursue the objective of securing everyone’s natural right to earn a
viable income by a policy of ensuring everyone’s effective partici-
pation in production––by means of capital if labor alone does not
suffice.
We have just indicated the positive duties of government in
regulating the economy for the purpose of promoting and preserv-
ing Capitalism. In addition, government must, of course, regulate
economic activities, as it must regulate all other activities in society,
with an eye to preventing some men from inflicting injury on oth-
ers. Such things as adulteration of products, unfair practices, or
fraud in business transactions, should be no less subject to pro-
scriptive regulation than embezzlement and highway robbery.
The role of government in relation to the economy has a nega-
tive as well as a positive side. To promote Capitalism, there are cer-
tain things government should not do, and these are as important
as the things it should do. Government should not own and oper-
ate capital property except in those rare instances, such as public
highways, in which private ownership is unworkable. With the ex-
ception just noted, government should not engage in the produc-
tion of wealth; and, consequently, it should avoid engaging in the
distribution or redistribution of wealth incidental to engaging in its
production.
Finally, the theory of Capitalism as a political economy calls for
a thorough re-examination and, probably, reformation of two
169
quasi-political institutions––the stock corporation and the labor
union. These two institutions are themselves the inevitable by-
products of an industrial or capitalist mode of production.
In an industrial system of production the capital required for
large-scale enterprises is of such magnitude as to require joint stock
holdings and shared ownership; and with every stage of techno-
logical advance, it has become more and more necessary for the
stock corporation, with a large number of nonoperating owners of
the shares of its stock, to replace the solitary capitalist who both
owned all the capital involved and managed the operation himself.
For a quite different reason the factory system of production,
during the hundred years or more when primitive capitalism pre-
vailed, necessitated the formation of labor unions in order to give
those who could participate in production only by labor sufficient
power to cope with the enormous power wielded by the few in
whose hands the ownership of capital was concentrated.
Over a hundred years ago, de Tocqueville saw in the rise of
these new forms of voluntary association the emergence of what
he called “secondary agencies of government.” These, he thought,
might serve to prevent the concentration of all political and eco-
nomic power in the hands of the State, as in a sense the feudal
lords of the ancient regime, functioning as secondary agencies of
government, prevented all political and economic power from be-
ing concentrated in the sovereignty of the king. The corporation
and the union might thus prevent the mass society, which was just
emerging and which he called “democracy,” from degenerating
into the tyranny of the totalitarian state.68
Soviet Russia, in which there are neither stock corporations nor
labor unions, confirms de Tocqueville’s brilliant insight into the
conditions under which a mass society with an industrial economy
would experience the tyranny of the totalitarian state. But de Toc-
queville did not foresee the role that corporations and labor unions
would play as opposing centers of power in the economic conflicts
68 See Democracy in America, Second Part, Book IV, Chs. 5-6.
170
of mixed capitalism; nor did he foresee the difficulties that democ-
ratic governments would face in controlling these quasi-political
institutions, some with more economic power at their disposal than
most of the cities or states that constitute subordinate units of gov-
ernment in the federal organization of our political society.
In the American tradition, it has long been a maxim of gov-
ernment that it is not power as such, but irresponsible or uncon-
trollable power which endangers freedom. The giant corporations
which now exist and the giant labor union which has just come
into existence represent enormous concentrations of power which
have not as yet been made fully responsible for the use they make
of their power. The most difficult task that government faces, in
effecting the transition from our present mixed capitalism, is to
tame and harness the power of these creatures of capitalism and,
by making them responsible in the discharge of the limited func-
tions they should perform, make them serve Capitalism and de-
mocracy, or at least prevent them from despoiling either.69
The problem of the labor union under Capitalism is different
from the problem of the corporation. Under Capitalism, the labor
union will obviously not be needed as an instrument of power to
effect a laboristic distribution of wealth. This was the function it
performed in the transition from primitive to mixed capitalism, and
is still performing. But to say that the labor union will not be
needed to perform this function in a justly organized economy,
with diffused ownership of capital and a capitalistic distribution of
wealth, is not to say that there will then be no socially useful ser-
vice for it to undertake. Voluntary associations of capitalist work-
ers, operating through democratic processes of self-government,
may serve their own members and the whole society by function-
ing as agencies for the economic education of the newly made
capitalists, and as instruments for the protection of their property
rights.
69 On this subject, see the discussion of the corporation by Scott Buchanan in
his Essay on Politics, New York, 1953; Ch. IV.
171
The problem of the corporation is largely one of restoring
shareholders to their full powers and rights as the owners of capital
and the employers of management. At present, the stockholder is
almost disfranchised by the usurpation of economic power by
management and boards of directors. This is aggravated by the
prevailing shibboleth that the “passive” nonoperating shareholder
should be quite content to abdicate the power and rights which go
with this property, in favor of the “active” nonowning managers of
the enterprise. This amounts to saying that it is to his own interest
to relinquish his hold on his property for the sake of obtaining
such returns as management, in its superior wisdom, thinks fit.
The theory of Capitalism calls for a radical reformation of the
relation of the owners of capital to operating management. It en-
visages making corporations responsible, by making them compete
for new capital in the open market instead of allowing them to
withhold a large part of each year’s capital earnings and to use that
wealth, without the shareholders’ consent, for further capitaliza-
tion. It maintains that a full annual distribution of the wealth pro-
duced by the capital of mature corporations, i.e., the distribution of
the net income of such corporations to their stockholders, is indis-
pensable to the restoration of the full rights of private property in
the most important productive assets of our economy, as well as to
the reduction of concentration of ownership and the elimination of
a major source of market monopoly.
This proposition is absolutely essential to the practical program
for creating Capitalism as the ideally just economy and the eco-
nomic substructure for the justice and freedom of democracy. We
will discuss its practical implications in Chapter Eleven, which
treats of the modern corporation in the transition to Capitalism.
For the present, no more need be said than that in the political
economy of Capitalism the legal reconstitution of the corporation,
as well as its effective regulation, is one of the primary positive
tasks of government.
172
THE ETHICS OF CAPITALISM
Democracy and Capitalism are in themselves intrinsically desirable
for the justice and freedom they establish as the essential condi-
tions of a truly classless society. But establishing the conditions of
such an ideal society will be a hollow triumph unless the human
beings who live under such conditions put them to good use.
Whether or not they will depends largely on whether our society,
through the liberal education of all its members or through other
means, can achieve a moral and intellectual revolution––one which
leads human beings to put good institutions to good use.70
That revolution is needed to reverse two tendencies that are
almost universal in our society. Each expresses a wrong order of
values. Each, therefore, springs from the same basic error in eth-
ics––the error of mistaking a means for an end.
One is our tendency under a mixed economy to glorify toil or
subsistence work for its own sake. We look upon economic activity
as an end rather than as a means. We express this attitude by the
way in which we subordinate to economic activity the much more
important and difficult creative activities that lie outside the sphere
of the production of wealth––the activities of politics, religion, the
fine arts, pure science, philosophy, teaching, etc. We express this
misguided tendency in our disdain for men who, with adequate
income from capital property, do not continue to engage in one or
another form of subsistence work. We express it when we speak of
the cessation of subsistence work as “retirement,” as though when
70 The moral and intellectual virtues that are needed to make a man a sound and
responsible capitalist are of no higher order than those required for intelligent
and responsible citizenship. If liberal education ever becomes adequate to the
task that confronts it in a society in which citizenship is conferred on all, and in
which all need to be helped by education to become good citizens, it will also be
able to help all who have become capitalists to acquire the virtues a good capital-
ist should have.
173
the task of providing enough wealth for economic security is com-
pleted, the main purpose of human life has been accomplished.
The other tendency is found in our substitution of the pursuit
of wealth for the pursuit of happiness. We regard wealth as if it
were a good without qualification or without limit––the more of it
the better, no matter how it is used. We forget that the acquisition
of wealth by a household is only a means to an end, a means which
is well-used only when it provides the members of a household
with such physical comfort and security as is necessary to enable
them to live good human lives. We, therefore, fail to recognize that
the amount of wealth that any household needs is strictly limited,
and that the amount in excess of reasonable needs which it can put
to good use is relatively slight. In short, we give to wealth, which is
at best a means of human development, the unlimited and unquali-
fied goodness that belongs only to the end we should pursue––the
fullest perfection of ourselves as human beings.
These two tendencies run counter to the direction which the
capitalist revolution must take.
The elevation of economic activity to a place it should not have
in human life or, worse, the treatment of subsistence work as if it
were intrinsically virtuous, instead of merely compulsory, blinds
men to the moral significance of Capitalism’s insistence that the
ideal is not the full employment of men in the labor of producing
wealth, but the full enjoyment by men of the liberal activities or
leisure work that machine-produced wealth can make possible for
all.
A revolution that seeks to make all men capitalists loses its
moral point if men feel they can retain their self-respect only
through earning their living by labor, instead of feeling that they
are doing much more for themselves and their society by effec-
tively and fully using its machine-slaves in order to devote a sub-
stantial portion of their time and energies to liberal pursuits and to
the work of civilization. Unless an early release from the compul-
sion of subsistence work for all ranks of labor, managerial and
technical as well as mechanical, is regarded, not as retirement, be-
174
ing shelved, or going off on a permanent vacation, but as a promo-
tion or graduation to better employments, Capitalism offers a
dreadful prospect instead of an inspiring challenge.
The attitude which looks upon the acquisition of wealth as a
competitive game to be indulged in for the pleasure it affords,71 or
the attitude which looks upon the accumulation of wealth––
without limit––as a morally acceptable measure of human
achievement, must necessarily lead men to reject the proposition
that the individual acquisition and accumulation of wealth should
serve the things that wealth itself is needed to support.
Rejecting this proposition, they are also likely to reject the pro-
posal that individual accumulations of capital should not be per-
mitted to grow beyond the point at which they necessarily exclude
other households from adequately participating in the production
of wealth. The feeling that their individual liberty would be in-
fringed by such limitation will make them deaf to the clearest proof
that justice requires it. Since the principles of economic justice are
essential to Capitalism, and since it regards nothing that justice
demands as an encroachment on freedom, the program of Capital-
ism cannot avoid meeting strong emotional resistance in some
quarters of contemporary society.
It is our hope that such resistance can be overcome by enlight-
ened self-interest, if by nothing else. Beyond that, it is our deeper
hope that liberal education can alter the attitudes and even reverse
the tendencies which turn men away from or against the goals of
the capitalist revolution.
If that revolution were to take place through the pressure of
circumstances and without moral commitment to its aims and
principles, the result would be a society whose economic and po-
litical institutions were morally better than its human beings. An
industrial economy which persists in the maldistribution of capital,
its most productive factor, or which cannot find a way of checking
inflation, may contain the seeds of its own destruction; but that is
71 On this point, see Frank Knight’s essay, “The Ethics of Competition,” in a
volume of essays which bears that title (New York, 1935).
175
as nothing compared with the human havoc and corruption en-
gendered in a society which is ideally suited to the best in human
nature but for which men have not made themselves fit.
Even the best institutions do not operate automatically for the
benefit of mankind. Their ultimate result is no better than the ethi-
cal goals or ideals men set themselves and discipline themselves to
seek. Freedom gives men the opportunity to live well, and justice
makes that opportunity equal for all. But neither guarantees that
men will avail themselves of it for the highest development of
which each is capable.
176
PART TWO
T H E P R O G R A M
O F T H E
C A P I T A L I S T
R E V O L U T I O N
177
9 SUMMARY OF THE
PRACTICAL PROGRAM
THE NATURE OF THE PROPOSALS
The argument that the capitalist revolution is our only choice, no
matter how sound, would be an academic exercise if a feasible pro-
gram of bringing it about could not be devised. The conception of
Capitalism as the only just organization of an industrial economy,
and as the economic counterpart of democracy, deserves sustained
public attention only if it has practical as well as theoretical truth.
We think that the theory of Capitalism can be put into practice.
We think that those who are convinced by the argument that carry-
ing out the capitalist revolution is our only way of avoiding com-
plete socialism are right now in a position to begin acting on that
conviction. The main propositions that constitute the theory of
Capitalism and the argument for it lead to a whole series of practi-
cal proposals for accomplishing the necessary reforms of our pre-
sent, only partly capitalistic, economy. The chapters which follow
178
set forth the practical steps we recommend as worthy of the most
serious consideration.
It is one thing to state the propositions of a theory and quite
another to advance practical proposals for the reform of existing
institutions. In the one case, we are engaged in the kind of thinking
that stands or falls by the ordinary tests of truth––the evidence of
facts and the soundness of principles. But in the other, we are try-
ing to plot a course of change in human affairs, beset by future
contingencies that are not foreseeable, or only dimly so, and com-
plicated by the habits and prejudices of all the human beings in-
volved. Any thinking one can do about such matters stands or falls
by a different sort of test––the agreement, on the part of all who
are asked to undertake the changes proposed, that the proposals
advanced are, or are not, worthy of practical deliberation and pub-
lic debate.
At one time, we felt that we had discharged our responsibilities
to the future by stating the theory of Capitalism and arguing for the
truth of its propositions, including the proposition that the future
of our democratic society requires the capitalist revolution to pro-
vide it with the economic substructure it needs. We felt that any
practical program for carrying out that revolution must be devel-
oped by the joint efforts of everyone involved, especially by the
practical deliberations of the leaders in our political and economic
life––our statesmen, legislators, administrators, business executives,
labor leaders, bankers, lawyers, engineers, economists, scientists,
philosophers, and educators. We felt that any attempt on our part
to lay down a detailed blueprint for a course of action that it may
take fifty years or more to carry out would be presumptuous, not
only because of all the unforeseeable future contingencies involved
but also because of all the sources of wise opinion that should be
consulted before practical deliberation can come up with a sound
program of action.
Our reluctance to risk the presumption involved in advancing
practical proposals, no matter how tentatively they are presented,
has been overcome by the experience we have had again and again
179
in discussing with others the idea of the capitalist revolution and
the theory of Capitalism. We were repeatedly asked to give some
reasons for thinking that our mixed capitalism could be trans-
formed into a completely capitalistic economy. We were repeatedly
told that, regardless of the truth of the theory and regardless of the
consequences for mankind of failing to put it into practice, it is
now too late to do anything about it. It might have been possible
to create Capitalism out of whole cloth, had its principles been
recognized and accepted at the outset of the industrial revolution;
but the path we have already taken from primitive capitalism to
mixed capitalism no longer permits us to turn the other way.
It is in response to these queries, doubts, and misgivings that
we have decided to outline what we hold to be a feasible practical
program. We think that its proposals show that it is not too late to
change the direction our society has been following. We think that
the proposals are sufficiently practicable as outlined to warrant the
best efforts of everyone concerned to make them more practicable.
We have no doubt that they can be improved in every way, that
they can be supplemented by additional recommendations as un-
foreseeable developments must be taken into account, and that
they can be implemented in detailed ways that no one at present
may be able to devise. These proposals are necessarily dated. Were
we or anyone else to reconsider them a quarter of a century from
now, the proposals would most certainly be modified to fit circum-
stances beyond anyone’s present imagination. What has always
been true of the task of plotting for the future is especially true in a
century of constantly accelerated technological progress.
In submitting these proposals to our fellow citizens, we are
acutely aware that the detailed legislative and business reforms
which are necessary to bring about the transition to a completely
just and also a completely capitalistic society call for the most in-
tense study that can be given them by the best economic, political,
legal and scientific minds in our society. With such study, we have
no doubt that an entirely workable program can be devised for
guiding our economy away from its trend toward socialism and in
180
the direction of Capitalism. We also have no doubt that that pro-
gram can be put into effect through due process of law and under
the auspices of public as well as legislative debate. Both the pro-
gram itself and the ways of working it out are perfectly consonant
with the genius of our established institutions.
We know that any set of practical proposals for a radical
change will elicit ill-considered criticism as well as careful study and
constructive effort to improve them. We are willing to risk the one
for the sake of the other. But in facing both of these alternatives,
we hope the following things will be borne in mind: that we do not
believe these proposals are the final or the best proposals which
can be devised; that we do not believe they can be acted on with-
out sustained study and deliberation; and that we do not believe
that all their shortcomings can be foreseen by anyone whose vision
of the future is limited.
Nevertheless, we do believe that the measures proposed are
workable, and that they demonstrate the feasibility of the capitalist
revolution. In fact, we would argue that they are more workable
than any measures we would have to take to postpone or prevent
the complete socialization of our mixed economy without at the
same time trying to direct it toward Capitalism. If that is so, then
our proposal of these measures does not relieve others of their
own obligation to consider the problem that confronts all of us.
Everyone is called upon to think practically about how that prob-
lem can be solved.
With these cautionary remarks, we turn at once to an outline of
the practical program, stating first its general policies and then its
specific recommendations. The chapters to follow will discuss the
practical implications of the specific measures proposed.
GENERAL POLICIES
The following general policies should guide the course of action to
be undertaken. Our concerted effort should be:
181
1. To broaden the ownership of existing enterprises.
2. To encourage the formation of new capital and the organiza-
tion of new enterprises owned by new capitalists.
3. To discourage the concentration of the ownership of capital by
households where such concentration has passed beyond the
point determined to be the maximum consistent with a just or-
ganization of a completely capitalistic economy.
SPECIFIC RECOMMENDATIONS
Pursuant to the general policies stated above, we recommend the
following specific measures:
1. Increasing the use of equity-sharing plans in industry.
2. Modification of death and gift tax laws to encourage the crea-
tion and the inheritance from generation to generation of a
vastly increased number of viable capital estates.
3. As the transition to Capitalism progresses, elimination of the
corporate income tax, together with adjustment of the personal
income tax for the purpose of raising the necessary revenues of
government from all the households of the economy in an eq-
uitable manner.
4. Elimination of governmental practices which directly aggravate
the concentration of the ownership of capital.
5. Effective regulation of the economy by government to assure
that free and workable competition is maintained in all markets
except those rare instances in which, for technical physical rea-
sons, monopolies must be permitted.
6. Recognition by the government of its obligation to assure all
households in the economy a reasonable opportunity to partici-
pate in the production of wealth to an extent sufficient to earn
a viable income.
182
7. Adoption of legislation designed to require mature corpora-
tions to pay out 100 percent of their net earnings to their
stockholders.
8. Development of a system of investment preferences for those
households which have subviable capital estates, in order to
promote their acquisition of viable capital estates.
9. Encouragement of the acquisition of viable capital holdings by
all households in the economy by tax and credit devices, ac-
companied by restrictions on the use of these devices calcu-
lated to prevent their being misused to develop concentrated
or monopolistic holdings, or their being used for speculative
purposes.
10. Primary use of our credit system to promote new capital for-
mation under the ownership of new capitalists in holdings of
submonopolistic size, together with a diminishing use of
credit to support consumption as balanced participation in
production is progressively achieved.
183
10 THE POINT OF DEPARTURE
FOR THE REFORMS PROPOSED
THE SITUATION FROM WHICH WE START
The present high standard of living in the United States is attribut-
able primarily to the high productiveness of capital. The weakness
of our mixed capitalist economy lies in the fact that, on the one
hand, the ownership of most of the capital producing about 90
percent of the wealth of the economy is concentrated in about 5
percent of the households of the economy; while, on the other
hand, more than 70 percent of the stream of income representing
wealth produced is distributed through labor. In our society a high
standard of living for all households has become a morally ap-
proved objective. In fact, it is an economic necessity if mass con-
sumption is to support mass production.
The capitalistic resolution of these conflicting elements in our
mixed economy lies in bringing about a balanced participation in
184
production through diffusing the ownership of capital. As the bur-
den of production shifts from labor to capital, so must the means
of participating in production shift from ownership of labor to
ownership of capital.72 As the wealth of the economy is increas-
ingly produced by capital, the distribution of the wealth of the
economy must be increasingly achieved through the ownership of
capital. The alternative to this is the erosion––to the vanishing
point––of the private ownership of capital itself.
As we consider the means of accomplishing the capitalist revo-
lution, we must recognize that our task today is different from
what it would have been one hundred fifty years ago if, standing on
the threshhold of the industrial revolution, we had then a clear idea
of how a capitalist economy should be organized. In that case, our
primary obstacle would have been the scarcity of capital instru-
ments. Our attention would have focused on the problem of di-
verting sufficient current production from consumer goods to
capital goods, in order to shift significantly the burden of produc-
tion from labor to capital. Under such circumstances, little effort
on the part of government would have been required to promote
Capitalism through bringing about a progressive diffusion in the
ownership of capital as its productive power progressively in-
creased.
Surprising as it may seem, our task today in bringing about the
transition to a fully capitalistic society is perhaps easier than it
would have been at any time in the past. We are possessed of capi-
tal equipment capable of producing nine-tenths of our goods and
72 The shift from participation in production as worker to participation as owner
of capital carries with it no certainty of a decline in aggregate employment. It is
true that as progressively more of the total wealth is produced by capital, and
less by labor, employment in terms of man-hours will decline unless increases in
total wealth produced offset the decreasing demand for labor. But it will also be
true in a completely capitalistic society that the economy need not produce sur-
pluses in order that the technologically displaced be enabled to participate in
production. When the effect of technological displacement falls upon men who
are capitalists as well as workers, they will still continue to participate in produc-
tion as owners of capital. Their contribution to production may even be en-
larged.
185
services. We have adjusted ourselves to the erosion of private
property in capital as the inevitable consequence of distributing
income laboristically in our mixed economy. We have learned to
bear artificially high and inflationary wages, unnecessary toil (e.g.,
featherbedding), and dozens of varieties of artificial stimulants to
industry for the sake of producing employment. We have come to
endure painfully high graduated personal and corporate income
taxes.
In short, while preserving the superficial appearances of private
property in capital, we are submitting to measures already more
severe (and they must become even more severe as technology a d-
vances) than those necessary to effect the capitalist revolution over
a reasonable period of time.
We shall see that the capitalist revolution can be in part ac-
complished by the use of currently tolerated and familiar income
taxes, estate taxes, and credit mechanisms. We shall also see that as
the distribution of income becomes less laboristic and more capi-
talistic (with a wider diffusion of ownership of capital), a progres-
sive reduction in the use of these measures will become both pos-
sible and necessary. At the same time, as the diffusion of economic
power becomes more complete, the danger of abuse of the taxing
and credit-control powers of government will diminish.
THE ROLE OF PRIMARY DISTRIBUTION
IN A CAPITALISTIC ECONOMY
Primary distribution is the distribution of purchasing power that
automatically results from participation in production. The contri-
bution of the worker to production results in his receipt of wages,
salaries, fees, bonuses, or other compensation. The contribution of
the owner of capital results in his receipt of rent, dividends, inter-
est, or payments for raw materials.
186
In a free economy, each participant receives in purchasing
power the value, competitively determined, of his contribution to
the wealth produced. It is the fact that the contribution has been
made by the use of his productive property which entitles each par-
ticipant to receive in some form, usually in money, the value of his
contribution toward the production of wealth.
The market value of the wealth produced sets a limit to what
producers and suppliers receive in the aggregate as their distribu-
tive shares of purchasing power. While the use of credit may
smooth out the operation of this system, it does not alter it in prin-
ciple, since sums borrowed must be repaid. The equality between
the wealth created and the purchasing power received can be ex-
pressed in the following manner:
Value of capital used in produc-
tion in the form of land, raw
materials, plants, machinery,
office buildings, working capital,
etc.
=
Aggregate purchasing
power received by the indi-
vidual owners of capital in
the form of rents, pay-
ments for raw materials,
interest, dividends, royal-
ties, etc.
Value of labor expended in
production
=
Aggregate purchasing
power received by the indi-
vidual owners of labor in
the form of wages, salaries,
bonuses, interest in goods,
fringe benefits, etc.
187
Value of wealth produced73
=
Total purchasing power
created by production, i.e.
the cost of total product to
consumers.
The ownership of the capital and labor engaged in any produc-
tive enterprise determines who shall receive the purchasing power
resulting from each contribution to the final product. The competi-
tively determined value of each contribution determines how much
of the total wealth produced shall be distributed to each owner par-
ticipating in its production. This is the automatic distribution of
wealth––the primary distribution––which would result from participa-
tion in the production of wealth in a completely capitalistic econ-
omy.
Under Capitalism, primary distribution would, therefore, be re-
sponsible for the general distributive pattern of the economy. Sec-
ondary distribution, which includes transfers of wealth taking place
outside of the production-distribution process, is made up of such
transactions as gifts, inheritance, transfers of wealth through mar-
riage, losing and finding, thefts, exchanges of property after it has
been acquired by its original ultimate consumer, and various other
forms of distribution not occasioned by the return upon produc-
tive effort. While the distributive pattern which results from sec-
ondary distribution may accord with, exaggerate, or tend to coun-
teract the pattern of primary distribution, primary distribution de-
termines the general distributive pattern of a capitalistic economy.
It is evident from the nature of primary distribution that the
purchasing power which arises from participation in production
must be fully applied, either to the purchase of consumer goods or
73 As Harold G. Moulton has tersely stated it, “the truth is that there is an iden-
tity between the market price of a commodity and the sums received by those
who have engaged in its production” (Income and Economic Progress, Brookings
Institution, Washington, 1935: p. 39).
188
to the purchase of capital goods, if the prevailing level of produc-
tion is to be maintained or expanded. If purchasing power is steril-
ized in idle savings (i.e., savings which are not or cannot be in-
vested in capital goods), output must be adjusted downward until
the wealth produced and the income used to purchase consumer
goods and capital goods are again in balance.
We have observed the fact that the ownership of capital may
be concentrated to any degree, while the ownership of labor in a
nonslave society is always completely diffused––each man being
the proprietor of his own labor power. The chief cause of the pre-
sent highly concentrated ownership of capital is the discrepancy
between the increasing productiveness of capital and the nearly
constant productiveness of nonmanagerial and nontechnical labor.
This differential productiveness began with the industrial revolu-
tion and has been increasing relentlessly ever since.
There are two subordinate causes of concentration in the own-
ership of capital. One is itself a direct result of the greater produc-
tiveness of capital: among the higher incomes of the economy, it is
generally true that the higher the income, the higher the proportion
that is derived from capital. The other cause is simply a well-known
pattern of economic behavior: excluding the great number of per-
sons in the low and lower middle income groups who account for
no capital formation, the higher the income, the smaller the pro-
portion that is spent upon consumer goods and services; or, what
is the same thing, the higher the income, the larger the proportion
that is normally invested in further capital formation.
Thus we see why the ownership of capital by individuals or
households tends in general to increase in a geometric progression.
In the absence of governmental regulations designed to counteract
it, the natural functioning of an industrial economy with private
property in capital results in a progressively greater concentration
rather than in a progressively greater diffusion of capital owner-
ship. So amazingly productive has capital become under the relent-
less advance of technology that this phenomenon has continued in
spite of the graduated corporate income tax (which falls entirely
189
upon the wealth produced by capital), and the steeply progressive
personal income tax (which generally confiscates a much greater
proportion of the income of the capital owner than of the worker).
INDIVIDUAL SECURITY VS. SECURITY FOR ALL INDIVIDUALS
One of the motives of the owner of capital in seeking to “plough
back” his income and thereby to expand his ownership of capital is
to provide himself and his household with ever more massive eco-
nomic security. The same process takes place, under much the
same influences, at the corporate level.
This phenomenon––the concentration of the ownership of
capital––is, on the other hand, the basic cause of depressions in a
capitalist economy. That insulation against the effects of a depres-
sion is one of the motives for concentration is not in itself startling.
But that it is itself a cause of depressions indicates why the widely
diffused ownership of capital is a necessity for the healthy func-
tioning of an advanced industrial economy.
The possession of massive economic security by a small pro-
portion of the households of the economy is destructive of the
economic security of all. The concentration of the production of
wealth in the hands of the few is inconsistent with participation in
its production by all. This is but another way of saying that the
production of most of the wealth by a small proportion of the
households is inconsistent with a just distribution of income to all
households. To the extent that all the households of an economy
derive an income under conditions of concentrated capital owner-
ship, the principles of charity or expediency (or both) must be op-
erative.
There is necessarily a limit to how concentrated the ownership
of capital can become without disrupting the stability of the econ-
omy. The advancing productiveness of capital may be viewed as
the comparatively declining productiveness of submanagerial and
subtechnical labor. With these changes, an opportunity to partici-
pate in the production of wealth to an extent sufficient to provide
190
a viable distributive share comes increasingly to mean an opportu-
nity to participate as a capitalist. The degree of concentration com-
patible with the right of every household to participate in produc-
tion is thus progressively lowered as technology advances. Simi-
larly, the degree of concentration compatible with the right of
every consumer unit to participate in production is progressively
lowered as the lowest income groups in the economy demand the
opportunity to produce more wealth in order that they may enjoy a
higher standard of living.
In a completely capitalistic economy, the balancing of partici-
pation in the production of wealth with the gradual shift from par-
ticipation through the employment of one’s own labor to participa-
tion through the employment of the capital one owns will be ef-
fected at a rate commensurate with that of technological progress.
This can only come about, in an economy that retains the institu-
tion of private property, through an ever greater diffusion of the
private ownership of capital. And when this comes about under
Capitalism, it will, by eliminating the cause of economic instability,
provide all with the sense of personal security that only some have
enjoyed in the past through their highly concentrated ownership of
capital.
The principles of Capitalism make it apparent that the
achievement by the few of massive insulation against poverty
causes poverty for the millions. Under Capitalism, such security
cannot exist for the few alone, but only for the many. In addition,
the balanced relationship which Capitalism will establish between
(a) participation by all households in production and (b) the distri-
bution of the proceeds of production to such households in pro-
portion to their productive contributions will eliminate the primary
hazard of equity ownership itself––the cyclical depression.
191
THE DEGREE OF CONCENTRATION
IN THE OWNERSHIP OF CAPITAL
It is necessary to examine more closely the extent and character of
the concentration that constitutes the central problem to be solved
in order to effect the transition from mixed capitalism to Capital-
ism.
We must first distinguish between the concentrated ownership
of capital and the concentrated ownership of consumer goods. The
regulatory problem of a capitalistic economy centers on unbal-
anced participation in production. This can only come about
through concentration in the ownership of capital, or through
some combination, within a household, of concentrated capital
ownership with participation in production by one or more of its
members as workers. No degree of concentration in the ultimate
ownership of consumer goods is significant for the problem of the
production and distribution of wealth in a capitalistic society. The
number of houses a man owns does not affect his participation in
production so long as he does not rent them to others. It makes no
difference how many yachts a family owns, so long as it does not
go into the transportation business. Similarly, it makes no differ-
ence how many books or suits a man owns, so long as he does not
open a bookstore or a clothing business.
With regard to the concentrated ownership of productive capi-
tal, common knowledge renders wholly unnecessary an extended
review of the many studies that have been made during the past
twenty-five years. We will content ourselves with two brief refer-
ences.
The great bulk of the productive capital in our economy con-
sists in the assets of corporations. In a study sponsored by the
Merrill Foundation for the Advancement of Financial Knowledge
and made by J. Keith Butters, Lawrence E. Thompson and Lynn L.
Bollinger in 1949, it was found that between 65 percent and 70
percent of all the marketable stock held by private individuals was
owned by families with estates in excess of $250,000. Such families
constitute a minute fraction of 1 percent of the households in the
192
economy. This study also disclosed that 75 percent of all such
marketable stock was held by the 2 percent of the population with
the largest incomes––$15,000 per year and over.
Nonmarketable stocks of corporations (i.e., the stocks of close-
ly held corporations) are even more concentrated in ownership,
while the highest concentration, of course, is to be found in pro-
prietorships and partnerships.74 In the July, 1956, issue of Labor’s
Economic Review, published by the CIO-AFL, it was reported that 92
percent of American families own no stocks of any kind. Studies
show that the ownership of corporate debt is even more highly
concentrated than the ownership of equities.75 A comparable con-
centration in ownership exists for individually owned real estate
used in business. Even in the case of farms, a strong tendency to-
ward large holdings is stimulated by technological advances which
give a great productive advantage to the large farm.
The real test of the concentration of ownership of capital in
the United States lies in the number of households owning a suffi-
74 The results of this study are summarized in “Effects of Taxation on the In-
vestment Policies and Capacities of Individuals,” by Lawrence E. Thompson
and J. Keith Butters, and published in the Journal of Finance, May, 1953, pp.
137-151
75 In its publication Who Owns American Business, 1956 Census of Shareowners, the
New York Stock Exchange, which has long urged a broadening of the owner-
ship of capital, reported that between 1952 and the end of 1955, the number of
people owning shares in publicly held corporations (corporations with securities
listed on a Registered Stock Exchange and having 300 or more stockholders)
increased from 6,490,000 to 8,630,000––an increase of 33 percent. The inconsis-
tency of this fact with the concentration of ownership as shown by all major
studies is apparent rather than real. The Exchange’s study does not even purport
to reflect concentration of ownership. The ownership of ten shares, or even one
share in a public corporation, is all that is necessary to be counted as a share-
holder in this study. Two-thirds of the shareowners counted were in the $7,500
per year income level or below––a group shown by all other studies to be insig-
nificant in the formation of the equity capital of American business. What the
Exchange’s study does show is that an increasing number of people are inter-
ested in becoming owners of capital or of securities representative of capital.
193
cient amount of capital in any form to provide them either with a
viable income at present levels, or any significant portion of such
income. The available evidence confirms what anyone would sus-
pect––that the number of such households is minute. It is not, in
any event, over 5 percent of all households.
THE FORMS OF CONCENTRATED
OWNERSHIP OF CAPITAL
To consider the forms which the concentrated ownership of capi-
tal takes, we must remember that the essence of private property is
to give its individual owners control over the use and disposition
of their property.
In the case of property in capital, the forms which such owner-
ship can take are various. Capital privately owned by individuals
may be held in corporate form. In this case, the owner of the capi-
tal is a fictitious person––the corporation. In legal theory, the own-
ership of the corporation lies in its stockholder or stockholders.
The stockholders may at any time eliminate the intermediate entity,
by dissolving the corporation and assuming direct ownership of its
assets and business. The corporation is, however, a most effective
method of uniting the productive power of capital with the talents
of managers, technicians, and other workers; and it is ordinarily not
convenient (even aside from tax considerations) to dissolve a cor-
poration in order to enforce the property rights of a stockholder.
Most of the productive capital in the United States is held in
the corporate form. Nevertheless, substantial amounts of capital
are subject to direct individual ownership (proprietorships), or held
by partnerships, trusts, and other forms of association. Whatever
form ownership takes, it is vitally important, if a capital asset is to
be private property, that its control be vested in its owners as such.
When, for example, corporate management is more influenced in
the making of decisions, by the state (or by those to whom the
state has loaned its countervailing power) than by its own stock-
holders, then the corporate capital is no longer predominantly pri-
194
vate property. It has become predominantly state controlled and,
correspondingly, state owned.
We regard the household as the basic unit of ownership be-
cause the household is the basic unit for spending income and be-
cause it is family or household income that generally determines
the standard of living of the individuals in the family unit.
We have already called attention to the distinction between an
actual concentration of private ownership of capital and what is
merely an apparent concentration of privately owned capital. The
real measure of concentration where ownership is partly nominal
and partly effective is the extent to which the wealth produced by
capital actually flows into the hands of its owner or owners. The
real measure of concentration where ownership is fully effective
would be the magnitude of the income received within a given pe-
riod by the owners of the capital in question.
For example, let us consider the case of a household owning
capital invested in an incorporated business (or in diversified in-
vestments in a number of such businesses) which produces, after
taxes, $200,000 a year. If the ownership of this capital were fully
effective and the household received the entire $200,000 annually,
it is clear that this household would have the earning power or
wealth-producing power of 40 worker households in which the
earning power of the worker or workers averaged $5,000 a year per
household. On the other hand, if this capital-owning household
received only $50,000 a year, the rest being drained off through
artificially high wages and the uncontrollable decisions of manage-
ment to withhold the disbursement of a portion of corporate in-
come to stockholders, and if this condition continued year after
year, it is clear that the ownership of the capital in question would
be 25 percent effective and 75 percent illusory or nominal. Where
income taxes levied upon the corporation provide funds for ex-
penditures outside the proper sphere of government (e.g., for redis-
tribution of wealth to submarginal farmers, or to support eco-
nomically unnecessary toil), the ownership of the capital may be
even further attenuated.
195
The ownership of capital may be partly or wholly nominal, i.e.,
it may in varying degrees lack effectiveness, regardless of the form
of ownership. If it is owned in corporate form, such ownership
may become ineffective through the short-circuiting of the flow of
wealth produced by the capital so that none, or only a part of it,
reaches the capital owner. This may come about through income
taxes, excise taxes, or property taxes levied to provide funds for
purposes outside the proper sphere of government, i.e., for the re-
distribution of income. It may come about through diversion of
the wealth produced by capital to workers, as it does wherever
wages are raised by legislation or union pressure above the level at
which they would be set by free competition. It may come about
through the ineffectiveness of the laws of property as applied to
stockholders’ rights in corporations, as it happens whenever these
laws leave stockholders without any means of enforcing their right
to receive the income or wealth produced by their equity capital.
Corporate management can then, without consulting the stock-
holders, “plough in” earnings for the purpose of indefinitely ex-
panding the enterprise, instead of being forced to persuade and
justify further investment by stockholders who have been fully paid
their shares of the corporation’s earnings.76
One other form of concentration of productive power remains
to be mentioned before we consider ways of solving the problem
that concentration raises. As we have seen, productive power may
be concentrated by combining within a household the ownership
of productive capital with the participation in production by one or
more members of the household as workers. Such concentration
reaches its peak when ownership of a large amount of capital is
combined with holding a very highly paid position as a managerial
or technical worker in one or more businesses, or with a lucrative
professional practice in law, medicine, engineering, accountancy,
76 These causes of the ineffectiveness of private property held in corporate form,
except for the withholding of dividends by corporate directors, also operate in
other forms of ownership.
196
etc. Where there is a surplus of workers (i.e., of persons whose only
means of participating in production is through labor), this be-
comes a most important form of concentration.
HOW MIXED CAPITALISM DEALS WITH THE
EFFECTS OF CONCENTRATED OWNERSHIP
Before we discuss the transition from our mixed economy to Capi-
talism, let us ask how our present form of mixed capitalism handles
the natural tendency of capital to increase in the hands of its own-
ers at a geometric rate. To reduce the question to figures, if capital,
the great bulk of which is owned by about 5 percent of the house-
holds, produces 90 percent of the wealth, what prevents this 5 per-
cent of the households from receiving 90 percent of the income?
Were the property rights of the owners of capital fully re-
spected, that is precisely what would happen. A completely capital-
istic society would be so regulated by its government that if 90
percent of the wealth were produced by capital, the diffusion of
private ownership would be sufficiently broad so that 90 percent
of the income could be distributed as a return to capital and still
maintain widely diffused purchasing power.77
How does mixed capitalism meet this problem? The answer in
general is obvious. Our mixed economy does not attempt to dif-
fuse the private ownership of capital throughout the households
of the society. Instead, it diffuses the wealth produced by capital;
that is, it distributes to labor a large part of the income which
77 This would be true whether or not the labor force were “fully employed.”
Thus if, as a matter of competitive evaluation of all contributions to production,
labor produced only 10 percent of the national wealth, then the total wage share
of the national income would be 10 percent. There might still be full employ-
ment if, despite the low labor content in the goods and services produced, co n-
sumer demand raised production to a level at which all available employment
was absorbed. This condition would probably exist in an advanced industrial
economy only when it was in the throes of war.
197
would go to the owners of capital if their property in capital were
fully respected.
The following are the more important of the entirely familiar
devices by which our mixed economy transfers at least two-thirds
of the wealth produced by capital to the noncapital-owning
households of our society:
(1) First and foremost is the method urged by the Communist
Manifesto in 1848: “A heavy progressive or graduated income tax.”
Because most of the high incomes are largely capital incomes, the
graduated personal income tax relieves the owners of capital of a
far greater share of their income than it does in the case of the
owners of labor. The graduated corporate income tax has a differ-
ent effect. It is not heavier on capital-income than upon worker-
income. It falls totally and exclusively on the wealth produced by
capital. This is true of manufacturing excise taxes and property
taxes on capital instruments.
(2) The graduated personal income tax itself discourages the
distribution to stockholders of corporate earnings. Few corpora-
tions pay out more than half their net earnings. Many go on for
years retaining much more than half. The tax laws are designed to
prevent “withholding” payment of dividends where the purpose is
to avoid taxes. But intent to plough earnings into further capital
investment is an effective and recognized excuse for the indefinite
accumulation of earnings.
The laws of property, as applied to stockholders, are almost a t-
tenuated to nonexistence in this instance. The decision whether
stockholders shall receive the wealth that their capital produces lies
not with stockholders, say the courts, but with management––the
top echelon of workers. Generations of stockholders come and go
without ever possessing or controlling more than a small fraction
of the wealth their nominally owned capital produces.
The weakness of the property rights of stockholders and the
overpowering strength of the graduated personal income tax con-
spire to corral within corporations vast quantities of the wealth
produced by capital. From this collective reservoir, by arrange-
198
ments between government and unions, it is used richly to sup-
plement actual wages. It may with little resistance be appropriated
by the government to pay for agricultural surpluses, subsidize for-
eign distributions of wealth, pay for excessive quantities of arms,
and promote all manner of artificially stimulated toil.
(3) One of the largest employers of labor is the construction
industry. Governmental policies of easy mortgage credit enable a
home buyer, for example, to create employment today by spending
wealth that he will produce over the next twenty or thirty years.
Here is an instance of a policy to credit-finance a consumer item of
the magnitude of a small capital holding. The shortage of homes of
a desired quality is sometimes incidentally mentioned in connection
with this program. For the most part, however, the proponents of
these programs and the political leaders who echo their proposals
are more frank. The objective is full employment.
(4) Another large employer of labor is manufacturing. Our
mixed economy stimulates employment through governmentally
supported easy consumer credit to encourage the purchase of du-
rable goods. Among these durable goods are some of the most im-
portant consumer items in our high standard of living: automo-
biles, washing machines, dish washers, vacuum cleaners, furnaces,
refrigerators, freezers, televisions, bathroom fixtures. Our mixed
economy provides the households of the economy with credit to
enjoy these consumer goods––just as a completely capitalistic
economy would make it possible for its households to acquire
them largely through their capital incomes.
(5) Farm employment is stimulated through the governmental
purchase of agricultural surpluses, the “soil bank” program, and
the direct fixing of prices above their competitive level as in the
case of the dairy industry. Both of these types of program result in
the elevation of the cost of living for all households. These pro-
grams to a large extent redistribute income to farmers as part of
the general program of redistributing income to non-capital-
owning households.
199
(6) Employment is “spread” through a multiplicity of restric-
tions upon worker output. Limitations are placed on the number
of bricks that may be laid, the number of pieces of work that may
be handled, the number of minutes of work between intermissions.
Employers are forced to hire more drivers than they need, more
helpers than can effectively work, orchestras that merely sit in the
wings, linotype operators who unnecessarily duplicate the type al-
ready set up, etc. With government protection and encouragement,
rules of work-jurisdiction have been established by labor unions so
that construction jobs require maximum employment rather than
maximum efficiency, skill, ability, or effort.78
(7) Through a device called “collective bargaining” (which
originally and wholesomely meant giving employees as much
“weight” as the employers with whom they must discuss wages,
hours and working conditions), government and unions collaborate
to raise wages far above their competitive level. This is the most
direct method of awarding to workers the income produced by
capital. It introduces into the economy a governmental enfran-
chisement of unions to levy taxes upon employers, stockholders,
and upon the economy as a whole. It sanctions a form of monop-
oly and conspiracy made effective by organized force which dwarfs
any industrial monopoly ever contrived. It eliminates from a major
area of the economy the use of objective, impartial, and free com-
petition as a just determinant of economic values. Its only “justifi-
cation” is that without a redistribution of income effected in this
78 There is another type of concealed unemployment which, though less well
known than featherbedding, may be just as prevalent and just as effective in
promoting laboristic distribution. It has been examined satirically by Professor
C. Northcote Parkinson, who shows that because “work expands so as to fill the
time available for its completion,” there is no limit to the growth in size of the
clerical or administrative staff of a corporation or a government office, whether
its work increases, stands still, or decreases. This tendency, called “Parkinson’s
Law,” undoubtedly accounts for incalculable clerical and managerial “feather-
bedding” within corporate and government offices. See Parkinson’s Law, by C.
Northcote Parkinson, Boston, 1957.
200
manner, there would not be sufficient mass purchasing power in
our present economy to support mass production.
(8) Our mixed capitalist economy frequently increases em-
ployment by the regularization of war expenditures. War goods
require the employment of labor to produce, but they do not sat-
isfy consumer demand. They create purchasing power in a manner
which requires further employment to satisfy that purchasing
power. However critically important war goods are in meeting the
actual needs of defense, beyond defense they are ideal for creating
“full employment” in a mixed economy. That would not be the
case in a completely capitalistic society where defense would be
defense, not a device for increasing employment.
(9) As in the case of the production of war goods in excess of
defense needs, our mixed economy can promote the laboristic dis-
tribution of wealth through foreign aid programs which are beyond
the needs of, or are entirely outside of, the requirements of de-
fense. Our mixed economy makes some foreign aid grants which
are inspired neither by international charity nor by sound defense
needs, but by the advantages to full employment of disposing
abroad of our surplus machine tools, agricultural commodities, etc.
(10) Our mixed economy periodically interrupts the process of
concentration of ownership of capital by imposing progressive
death and gift taxes. Not only do these taxes result in transfers of
large amounts of accumulated capital wealth to the government,
but they frequently impair market competition and promote the
further concentration of ownership of the physical assets involved.
In the case of many closely held corporations, taxes can be paid
only by sale of control of the business, and the buyer is often the
company’s most powerful competitor.
(11) Our mixed economy may by its tax laws promote a form
of socialization not ordinarily recognized as such. It is a form of
redistribution known as the charitable foundation. Charitable
foundations are, in legal contemplation, public entities. The wealth
within them is under the control of the state, and the foundations
themselves are so designed that the wealth can never revert to or
201
benefit those who transfer their wealth to such semigovernmental
agencies. From these foundations, wealth is distributed, under
rules laid down by government, for all sorts of purposes recog-
nized as charitable. From time to time, government may and does
change its views on how such income must be distributed.
Many of these expedients, resorted to by mixed capitalism, to
promote the laboristic distribution of the wealth produced by
capital in order to supplement the wealth actually produced by la-
bor, tend further to concentrate the nominal ownership of capital
within the economy. This is sometimes referred to as the “trickle
down” principle. Purchasing power is artificially introduced into
an economy which, to whatever extent the concentrated owner-
ship of capital is still effective, tends further to concentrate the
ownership of capital. This in turn requires imposing even stiffer
graduated income taxes to convert whatever effective ownership
remains into nominal ownership and diffused purchasing power.
202
11 MEASURES AIMED AT
BROADENING THE OWNERSHIP
OF EXISTING ENTERPRISES
EQUITY-SHARING PLANS
Profit-sharing, including the variety of pension plans most com-
monly used today, is fairly widespread. It is promoted by corporate
income tax deductions for contributions paid into these plans.
Until the transition to Capitalism has reached the point where a
predominantly capitalistic distribution has supplanted a predomi-
nantly laboristic distribution of our nation’s wealth, it will be nec-
essary to retain the steeply progressive income tax in order to pre-
vent the sterilization of dangerous amounts of purchasing power
that would take the form of savings in excess of capital formation.
Of itself, the income tax does not tend in the slightest degree to
broaden the diffusion of the ownership of capital. It relieves exist-
ing capitalists of a large portion of the wealth their capital pro-
duces, but it does not make new capitalists. But where deductions
against such heavy income taxation are permitted for contributions
203
to plans resembling our present profit-sharing––particularly stock-
bonus––plans, the income tax can be made to have a significant
effect in bringing about the transition to a completely capitalistic
economy. This can be done within existing tax rates.
To recognize the importance of these devices, it is necessary to
distinguish between profit-sharing or pension plans, which are merely
designed to supplement income to be spent by households on con-
sumption, and equity-sharing plans designed to make new capitalists.
Only the latter can be significant in broadening the capital-owning
group within the economy. Equity-sharing plans reach their maxi-
mum usefulness where they are of such magnitude that the income
from the equities accumulated for an employee can make a signifi-
cant addition to his worker income. So far as the creation of new
capitalists is concerned, the usefulness of an equity-sharing plan is
severely impaired if the arrangements are such that, when the em-
ployee obtains his portion of the trust, the equities are sold and the
proceeds spent on consumer goods.
Where equity-sharing plans are so designed that a man who be-
gins as a worker becomes, at the end of some years, an owner of a
substantial capital interest, such plans can make a positive contri-
bution toward transforming mixed capitalism into Capitalism. They
can do this without subjecting businesses to more severe tax sur-
gery than they are at present accustomed to.
Requiring mature corporations to pay out to their stockholders
the entire earnings of corporate capital (a subject we will discuss
later) would greatly improve the effectiveness of equity-sharing
plans where funds are invested in the equities of mature corpora-
tions.
Equity-sharing plans should not be built around the concept of
retirement, as that is currently understood in our “full employ-
ment” economy. The objective should be to build permanent, di-
versified capital estates––estates that will enable the new capitalists
to shift their participation in production from the employment of
their labor to the employment of their capital.
204
There is a profound difference in principle between laboristic
profit-sharing and capitalistic equity-sharing. The former provides
only an income or supplement to income for the worker to live on
when he ceases to earn wages. The latter enables the worker gradu-
ally to shift, over the period of his employment, from absolute de-
pendence on toil as the source of his income to dependence, in a
substantial degree, on his ownership of a capital interest. Such a
capital interest, if not impaired by estate or inheritance taxes (ex-
cept where its size, as a matter of public policy, is monopolistic),
would also provide income for the individual’s heirs upon his
death.
MODIFICATION OF DEATH TAX LAWS
AND GIFT TAX LAWS
For reasons which we have already discussed––primarily the ten-
dency of the ownership, or at least nominal ownership, of capital
to increase in a geometric progression––an industrial economy
finds it necessary, from time to time, to counteract excessive con-
centrations of economic power in certain households. It does this
through steeply graduated death taxes and gift taxes. Little, if any,
thought seems to have been given to the fact that while this elimi-
nates one type of concentration, it promotes others. At most, the
effect of these taxes upon the concentration of ownership of capi-
tal in particular families from generation to generation is to limit
personal ownership without promoting a diffused ownership of
capital.
Let us explain. Very large personal fortunes are, of course, even-
tually reduced by gift and estate taxes, although the assistance of
competent tax counsel can postpone and greatly minimize the im-
pact of such levies. Franklin Roosevelt answered criticism of the
socializing effect of the federal estate tax by saying (in 1939) that
while the government collects its tax in cash, the business organiza-
tions established and nurtured by deceased capitalists still remain.
205
What President Roosevelt neglected to observe was that the neces-
sity of raising cash to pay such taxes frequently results in the sale of
a closely held business to a former competitor.
The present form of our death and gift taxes aggravates the con-
centration of capital ownership in another way. Where it is other-
wise impossible by long-term trusts and other astute devices to
avoid the decimating effect of death and gift taxes, large capital
holdings today are transferred to tax-exempt foundations. In most
cases, such bequests are a kind of compulsory charity. The estab-
lishment of charitable trusts is more often traceable to the tax laws
than to genuinely charitable motives. As contrasted to the quiet
martyrdom of paying federal estate taxes in the 77 percent bracket
(in addition to state inheritance taxes), the establishment of a “per-
sonal foundation” permits some use of one’s imagination in
disposing of a fortune.
Today there are over 7,300 charitable foundations in the United
States with assets of over five billion dollars. The number is in-
creasing at a rapid rate. When they are viewed in the light of the
objective of the capitalist revolution (i.e., the diffused private own-
ership of capital), these foundations are subject to the following
criticisms.
They in effect convert concentrated private ownership into con-
centrated public ownership. In legal theory, as well as in legislative
contemplation, the holdings of charitable foundations are public
property. It should, therefore, be acknowledged that the transfer of
productive wealth to charitable foundations gives a huge impetus
to state control over capital. The establishment of tax-exempt
foundations therefore promotes socialism and works against Capi-
talism.
As great fortunes further accumulate in these tax-exempt sanctu-
aries, their use has become increasingly subject to legislative scru-
tiny. The funds of foundations do not perform the function of pri-
vate property. They do not provide a means by which individual
households in the economy can, through ownership of capital, par-
206
ticipate in the production of wealth to a degree beyond the capacity
of mere labor.
Before proposing changes in the death tax and gift tax laws of
the federal government to make them serve the cause of Capital-
ism, we must consider the importance of these laws to federal
revenue. The present rates of the federal estate tax progress from 3
percent on the first $5,000 of the tax base (after various exclusions)
to 77 percent on estates over ten million dollars. Federal gift tax
rates are about 25 percent less, and state inheritance tax and gift tax
rates are in general substantially less. Nevertheless, in 1956, the
federal estate and gift tax collections together accounted for only
about 1.5 percent of the revenue of the federal government. Hence
the contribution these taxes make to the support of government is
not sufficient to deter modifying them if doing so would signifi-
cantly promote the transition to Capitalism. The same holds for
state gift and inheritance taxes.
Several points emerge when we examine the use of gift and es-
tate taxes in terms of the theory of Capitalism. As we will show
presently, there is no question that these laws can be modified to
promote the transition to Capitalism. Let us keep in mind, how-
ever, that while it is of vital importance to reduce unworkable con-
centrations of capital ownership, it is of equal importance to pro-
mote the inheritance of viable capital interests by families and de-
pendents.
John Stuart Mill once expressed the view that estate tax laws
should, as a matter of public policy, fix a limitation upon the
amount an individual may inherit, leaving him in a position where
if “he desires any further accession of fortune, he shall work for
it.” This would not be entirely applicable under Capitalism. The
usefulness of Mill’s formula diminishes as the gulf between the ca-
pacity of capital and that of labor to produce wealth widens. Under
Capitalism, if a man should desire “further accession of fortune,” it
would only be through the ownership and husbanding of highly
productive capital that he could have a significant chance of suc-
cess.
207
To promote the transition to Capitalism, estate and gift tax laws
should be modified in the light of the following considerations.
The end to be encouraged is the acquisition of viable capital inter-
ests, lying within reasonable limits fixed by public policy. Hence the
tax incidence should be tailored to the size of the recipient’s capital holding, not
to the size of the donor’s estate. The tax deterrent should be nonexistent
or light upon gifts or bequests that help to broaden the private
ownership of viable capital holdings. Estate and gift taxes should
be heavy upon gifts or bequests which either fail to promote this
fundamental policy or which work against it by promoting exces-
sively concentrated ownership of capital.
Many considerations would enter into the legislative delibera-
tions necessary to fix the lower limit of capital holdings to be rec-
ognized by law as viable capital holdings. Within limits, this mini-
mum might vary with the number of persons in a household. It
might be measured by market value appraisal, or it might be meas-
ured by yield, or by both.
Many considerations will also enter into the legislative delibera-
tions required for drawing the line between capital holdings that
are viable (and so are to be legislatively encouraged) and holdings
that are monopolistic (and so are to be discouraged).
Some comment is needed on the significance of such limitations.
The specification of the minimum size of a viable capital holding
would be in effect a legislative determination that a capital holding
of at least this size (assuming wise diversification and reasonable
husbanding) is sufficient to support a household of a given size in
comfort. The specification of the level at which a capital estate is to
be regarded as monopolistic would be a legislative determination of
the point beyond which concentration of the ownership of capital
by a single consumer unit operates to exclude others from partici-
pating in the production of wealth to an extent capable of provid-
ing a viable income. These laws should be framed to encourage the
accumulation of capital by households in submonopolistic
amounts.
208
We have used the word “monopolistic” to characterize capital
estates which, in the determination of Congress or state legisla-
tures, are so large that they tend to exclude some households in the
economy from participating in production to an extent that results
in their having a viable income or decent standard of living.79 This,
to be sure, is a use of the word “monopolistic” that is somewhat
different from the sense in which it is customarily employed. How-
ever, in the theory of Capitalism the concept of monopolization of
participation in production is just as critical as that of market monopoliza-
tion.
Market monopolization is destructive of free competition, with-
out which there can be no just, objective, and impartial evaluation
of the contributions to production. Monopolization of participa-
tion in production is destructive of the right of every household to
participate in production in order that it may participate in distribu-
tion. Precisely because excessively large capital holdings represent
monopolization of participation in production, the form of distri-
bution in our mixed economy must be predominantly laboristic
and be governed by principles of charity and expediency rather
than of justice.80
79 For legislative purposes, some determination of a decent minimum standard
of living would have to be used in arriving at a determination of the limit at
which a capital holding of a consumer unit of given size shall be regarded as
monopolistic. The national median income, for example, might be used for this
purpose in estimating how large capital holdings could become before menacing
the right of those participating in production only as workers to supplement
their insufficient incomes by capital earnings.
80 The principle of just distribution operates to establish a direct relationship
between contribution to production and receipt of income out of production.
Those who do not participate in production cannot justly receive any part of the
primary distribution of the wealth produced. Monopoly enters the picture when
the participation in production by some, through their excessive ownership of
capital, excludes others from the opportunity to participate in production or to
participate adequately. But we should also bear in mind that the greater the dif-
fusion of capital ownership, the higher will be the tolerable limit of concentra-
tion of capital ownership in particular households. We can best see this by co n-
sidering the extremes. Where the productive capital of an economy is owned by
only a handful of the total number of households, a very severe limit on concen-
209
In addition, such monopolization is largely responsible for
making the private ownership of capital increasingly illusory or
nominal. If we were at present to give monopolistic private owner-
ship its full rights, the immediate result would be so violent a mald-
istribution of income that we would be on the verge of complete
economic collapse. Hence, from sheer economic expediency, if for
no other reason, we must in our mixed economy deny such mo-
nopolistic private ownership its full rights. In doing so, we simulta-
neously dilute the property rights of all owners of capital. In fact,
we must attenuate those rights to an extent that almost constitutes
an alienation of the property, and certainly leaves it private prop-
erty in a nominal sense only.
So much for the fundamental concepts to be used in modifying
our present gift and estate tax laws in order to promote Capitalism.
What is the essence of the modifications proposed? It is that gifts
and bequests which facilitate the creation of viable capital holdings
should be wholly free of tax. The revenue loss, as we have noted, would
be small. The benefits to the economy would be great. On the
other hand, gifts and bequests which facilitate the creation of mo-
nopolistic capital holdings should be steeply taxed––sufficiently so
as to render them nonexistent in our economy. The effect of gifts
and bequests would be measured after the gift or bequest. If the recipi-
ent household owned less than a monopolistic capital holding after
the gift or bequest, it would be free of tax. If its capital holding ex-
ceeded the monopolistic limit after the gift or bequest, that part in
excess of the limit would be progressively and steeply taxed.
trated capital ownership will be required to prevent the almost monolithic
growth of capital in the hands of a few families. At the other extreme, we can at
least imagine a society in which the ownership of capital by all households is
substantially equal and increases at a uniform rate. In such a society no limit
whatsoever would be required to enable all households to participate in the pro-
duction of wealth at any level of national income, however high. The significant point of
this imaginary case is that, as the transition to Capitalism progresses, progres-
sively greater individual holdings may accord with public policy.
210
This would place transfers of capital holdings by gift or bequest
to households without viable capital interests or having holdings
below the level of monopolistic size, on a parity with gifts to char-
ity. There would be no occasion to discourage gifts or bequests of
noncapital property because of the size of the recipient’s holdings
of either capital or noncapital property, except insofar as gifts of non-
capital property might be used as a disguise for creating monopolistic capital
holdings through gifts or bequests of noncapital property. There can be little
doubt that wise and reasonable donors or testators would prefer
this means of disposing of capital estates to the kind of empty,
shotgun charity that is encouraged by the existing tax laws.
One further modification of the gift and estate tax laws remains
to be considered. It would have special applicability to large,
closely held businesses. Provisions similar to the income tax provi-
sions of the equity-sharing type already discussed could be de-
signed for the gift and estate tax laws to enable equity interests in
closely held businesses to be distributed to employees through
nondiscriminatory equity-sharing plans. Such dispositions would be
given tax exemption under the gift and estate tax laws similar to
the exemptions now available for contributions to charitable cor-
porations.
Owners of large, closely held businesses are now faced with the
alternatives of the 77 percent bracket or an elegantly contrived
charitable foundation. Is there any doubt that many of these, given
the choice, would prefer to make capitalists of their employees, if
gift and estate tax exemptions enabled them to do so? For a rela-
tively slight loss in federal revenue, since no tax is collected on the
vast tax-inspired gifts to charity that are prevalent today, a great
acceleration in the broadening of the capital base could be
achieved, and in a manner that would promote the diffused private
ownership of capital instead of a socialized control of it.
What we have just said should not be construed either as im-
pugning the motives of those who establish charitable foundations,
or as questioning the traditional forms of charitable donation to
religious and educational institutions, or the giving of alms to the
211
needy. These traditional charities have never been a serious prob-
lem in the United States, and it is generally felt that they function
best when they are supported by widespread small contributions.
These legitimate charities can serve their purpose without causing
the erosion and alienation of private property in capital, as the vast
general-purpose foundations cannot.
The need for charity in an economy is largely a measure of the
failure of the economic system to achieve a balanced participation
in production and thereby to avoid a maldistribution of wealth.
Thus, for example, if every household in the economy could afford
to pay in full for the education of its members, the full expense of
which is conceivably a part of a decent standard of living, then
charitable contributions to educational institutions for the support
of their teaching functions would be unnecessary and out of place.
On the other hand, the traditional charities which take care of the
destitute and incompetent will always remain indispensable, though
even here success in eliminating destitution will minimize their
task.
It is quite a different matter with the vast general-purpose foun-
dations. Allowing for all the good they do, we cannot overlook the
fact that they contribute substantially to preventing the number of
capital-owning households from increasing at a rate that keeps
pace with that of technological advances in the production of
wealth. These foundations represent the best use their donors
could make of their vast capital interests in the light of corporation
laws, tax laws, and economic policies which are incompatible with
the principles of Capitalism. Under such conditions, as we have
observed, these foundations constitute a menace to the institution
of private property. That fact, together with the necessity that the
equity capital concentrated in them should be widely diffused
among private owners, requires a reappraisal of the gift and estate
tax laws that now encourage the formation of such foundations or
charitable trusts.
212
MODIFICATION OF PERSONAL INCOME TAX LAWS
Since about half of the revenue of the federal government is pro-
vided by the payment of personal income taxes, a far more cau-
tious study of this proposal is required than in the case of the es-
tate tax and gift tax proposals outlined above. We should try to
discover the extent to which personal income tax deductions might
be safely permitted to allow for transfers of wealth that facilitate
the broadening of our economy’s capital base. Within certain lim-
its, it might thus be possible and advisable to place such transfers
on a parity with contributions to charity, so far as the personal in-
come tax laws are concerned.
The laboristic distribution of wealth in our mixed economy has
necessitated a shockingly heavy progressive income tax. This tax
can unquestionably be used to help establish the balanced partici-
pation in production that Capitalism envisages as ultimately achiev-
able through diffused individual ownership of capital. Until the
capitalist revolution is well advanced, the adoption of permissive
deductions, within reasonable limits, for transfers of wealth that aid
in broadening capital ownership might be far wiser than rate reduc-
tions.
TERMINATING DELIBERATE GOVERNMENTAL PROMOTION
OF CONCENTRATION OF OWNERSHIP AND OF MARKET
MONOPOLY
As we have seen, most of the efforts to “make capitalism work”
are in fact devices for combining a predominantly laboristic distri-
bution of wealth with a predominantly capitalist production of it.
Many of these “expedient practices” are not merely un-Capitalistic
in their failure to bring about a widely diffused private ownership
of capital, but in fact are anti-Capitalistic in directly contributing to
the concentrated ownership of capital. One example of this is the
“five-year amortization of emergency facilities” program used ex-
tensively during the Second World War, again during the emer-
213
gency following the Korean outbreak, and in the period since the
termination of the Korean hostilities.
The theory of this program is that, while the government may
in time of emergency need quick additions to plant capacity, loss
may result to the investor if the emergency period is short and does
not enable him to derive the benefit he would normally expect
from the new capital equipment or facilities. To compensate for
this risk, the government extends to selected businesses the privi-
lege of deducting the “certified” cost of the new facilities against
income taxes over a five-year period. The ordinary economic life of
capital instruments as recognized for income tax purposes is fre-
quently much longer than five years. It varies for periods up to
twenty-five years for certain types of plant facilities and even for
some types of manufacturing equipment. The effect, therefore, of
the special statutory privilege is that of “an interest-free loan by the
Government to the taxpayer claiming amortization allowances.”81
The theory is that a taxpayer corporation which receives a “cer-
tificate of necessity” from the Office of Defense Mobilization for
accelerated amortization of new capital equipment would not be
willing to construct the additional facility in question without this
added stimulus. The fact of the matter is that the all-out effort to
promote “full employment” has eliminated the slumps in recent
years, and the industries to which such certificates have been
granted have generally been the most basic, highly productive in-
dustries in the peacetime economy as well as in the wartime econ-
omy. By June 10, 1957, 38.3 billion dollars of accelerated amortiza-
tion certificates had been granted under the Revenue Act of 1950.
On the 38.3 billion dollars of new capital formation thus inspired,
23.1 billion dollars of rapid depreciation was authorized.
There can be no question of the propriety of granting an inter-
est-free government loan for new capital facilities to General Mo-
81 See the memorandum prepared by the Staff of the Joint Economic Commit-
tee, dated May 28, 1956, on Implications of Recent Expansion of Special Amortization
Program, p. 10.
214
tors, for example, if the nation’s immediate safety depends upon it.
If the same physical or military result could not be achieved by
means which at the same time created new businesses owned by
new capitalists, or if this extraordinary advantage could not be made
contingent on fulfilling the requirement that the newly formed
capital be accompanied by a concurrent increase in new private
owners of capital, then the program might be justified in its present
form. But the only consideration taken into account by this pro-
gram is new capital formation resulting in new productive capacity. No
thought has been given to the possibility of using this program to
create new owners of capital in the process of increasing produc-
tive capacity by stimulating the formation of new capital.
Since 1950, such stimulation has increased the concentrated
ownership of the capacity to produce wealth, principally in indus-
tries in which the ownership is already highly concentrated, to the
extent of 38.3 billion dollars. This massive quantity of capital for-
mation has resulted from a government policy that is exactly the
opposite of what the policy should be in order to broaden the base
of capital ownership and maintain freely competitive markets. In-
stead of using the power of government to increase the number of
owners of highly productive capital investments, we have used it to
increase the present concentration of ownership.
Other examples can be cited to show how government and in-
dustry work together to boom up the expansion of capital, which is
good, while concentrating its ownership, which is bad. Our great
corporations, General Motors, General Electric, United States
Steel, Ford Motor Company, and many others, are showered with
praise for their boldness in announcing that over the “next x years,
we will spend y billions in capital expansion.” In each case, the im-
port of the announcement is that a corporation is going to place in
operation an enormous additional quantity of the most potent
wealth-producing factor in history. Almost none of these an-
nouncements contemplates any increase in equity capital by any
method other than the investment of earnings withheld from the
existing owners. Even where new equity capital is involved, almost
215
none of it comes from households that are not already large own-
ers of capital.
There are still other ways in which government policies encour-
age further concentration of ownership in our mixed capitalistic
economy. The policy of legislative and administrative support for
jurisdictional rules, excessive job classification, work limitation
rules, and infinite varieties of “paid unemployment” in industry, all
in the interest of “full employment” and a laboristic distribution of
wealth, tends to encourage and promote the concentration of own-
ership rather than its diffusion. These practices increase operating
costs to a point at which they can be absorbed only by the most
heavily capitalized businesses, since they divert a large portion of
the wealth produced by capital from the owners of capital to work-
ers. The ultimate effect is to discourage new business enterprises,
and thereby to impede potential new owners of capital from be-
coming capitalists.
216
12 THE MODERN CORPORATION
AND THE CAPITALIST REVOLUTION
CORPORATIONS IN THE PRESENT MIXED ECONOMY
The modern corporation has proved a matchless form for associat-
ing together the productive powers of workers (including techni-
cians and managers) and the productive power of capital. This
cannot be better evidenced than by the fact that the largest, most
complex, and most productive businesses are, for the most part,
conducted in the corporate form.
From the point of view of the theory of Capitalism, the corpo-
ration is an ideal instrument for assembling the capital owned by
many households in aggregations of such size as to permit produc-
tion to be carried on in the most efficient and least toil-consuming
manner. Within a single corporation, any amount of capital owned
by any number of shareholders may be combined with the mana-
gerial, technical, and mechanical skills needed to carry on produc-
tion in the technologically most advanced manner.
217
Mixed capitalism, however, misuses the corporation. Instead of
using it to diffuse the private ownership of capital among the
households of the society, it diffuses the wealth produced by capi-
tal to those who should, but do not, own capital. Its method of do-
ing this is governed by principles of charity and expediency.
The laboristic distribution of capitalistically produced wealth is,
to be sure, not confined to corporate business. For example, col-
lective bargaining agreements, which raise wages far above their
competitive level, are becoming as common with unincorporated
businesses as they are with corporations. Nevertheless, the use that
is made of corporations to carry out a laboristic distribution of
wealth gives the corporation first place among the redistributive
agencies of our mixed economy.
The corporation facilitates a laboristic distribution of wealth in
the following three ways.
(1) It is subject to a graduated income tax that is levied only
upon the wealth produced by capital. The federal government and
most states levy such taxes on corporations doing business within
their respective borders. These taxes provide about half of the
revenue of the federal government. They constitute a smaller, but
still important, source of state revenue. They are, therefore, a basic
source of income for the redistributive programs which are oper-
ated directly by the state, such as the subsidization of submarginal
agricultural enterprises, and the numerous programs that are de-
signed to promote full employment.
(2) Corporations are the largest employers of organized labor.
By a web of federal and state laws that have largely eliminated the
free play of competitive forces in the fixing of wages, wages have
been raised to a height far above the economic value of the work
for which they are paid. This is probably the most direct method of
diverting the income due to owners of capital to the owners of la-
bor.
(3) Corporations are not merely permitted indefinitely to
plough back the wealth produced by their capital. They are con-
strained to do so by the effect of the steeply graduated personal
218
income tax on the dividends received by their larger stockholders.
Though the benefits of this involuntary investment by stockholders
are to some degree vaguely reflected in the increased market value
of the stockholder’s shares, this is a fragmentary and frequently
elusive substitute for receipt by the stockholder of the full return
on his capital. These withheld dividends, to which stockholders
would be entitled if their property rights in equity capital were fully
respected, are the primary source for the formation of business
capital. The instruments which are brought into production by
such newly formed capital in turn become sources of new income
to be disposed of under government supervision in accordance
with the redistribution policies of mixed capitalism. So entirely dis-
torted have our views become that we admire the restraint of a la-
bor union which demands no more than all the increased wealth
produced by improved or additional capital instruments. It is be-
coming common for collectively bargained wage increases to out-
run the “productivity increase.”
In our partly capitalistic and partly laboristic economy, the
modern corporation has thus become an instrument for a distribu-
tion of wealth that is predominantly laboristic. It has served as a
device for attenuating the property rights in capital, and for almost
alienating that property from its owners. In the early years of its
existence, it was an ideal vehicle for the concentration of effective
ownership in stockholders. But as the concentration grew and
brought on depression after depression, it became impossible to
permit a full return to the owners of capital of the wealth produced
by their capital. Failing to recognize that private property in capital
in an industrial society eventually becomes untenable unless its
ownership is broadly diffused, our mixed economy settled upon
the other alternative. It brought about the erosion of private prop-
erty in concentrated holdings of capital through the diversion of
the wealth such capital produces, from the stockholders who own
it to the mass of workers who need it and whose use of it provides
a mass market.
219
CORPORATIONS IN THE TRANSITION TO CAPITALISM
In the operation of our great corporations today, the wealth pro-
duced by capital is divided by reference to considerations of expe-
diency. Some goes to supplement the wages labor really earns;
some, to pay the double tax on wealth produced by capital; some
to provide a major portion of new capital formation. A trickle is
returned to the nominal owners––the stockholders.
In a completely capitalistic economy, the division would be
made on the basis of the relative contributions made to production
by the owners of capital and the owners of labor. Effective prop-
erty in capital would replace the present merely nominal property
in capital. The truth that capital is the major producer of wealth
would correct the illusion that labor is the major producer of
wealth. The fact that the productiveness of capital constantly in-
creases (relative to that of labor) with advancing technology would
eliminate the pretense that the productivity of mechanical labor is
increasing. The major contribution made by capital to the output
of wealth would be reflected in the return to capital of a major por-
tion of the wealth produced. The conflict between the concen-
trated ownership of capital and the right of all households to par-
ticipate effectively in production would be resolved by a widely
diffused private ownership of capital.
A business corporation is an association of workers of various
talents and capacities with capital instruments and working capital
for the purpose of producing wealth. In a completely capitalistic society,
business corporations would be the basic vehicle of Capitalism it-
self, whereas under mixed capitalism, they are the basic vehicle for
the expedient or charitable distribution of income and the alien-
ation of property in capital.
To effect the transition from mixed capitalism to Capitalism,
business corporations should, therefore, be reformed and reconsti-
tuted with the following objectives in mind.
(1) The revitalization of the property of stockholders in the capital imme-
diately owned by their corporation. As we will point out later, the essence
220
of this lies in the return to stockholders of all the wealth produced
by their corporate capital.
(2) The greatly expanded use of present corporate income taxes as instru-
ments for diffusing private ownership of capital. The increased use of eq-
uity-sharing plans, already discussed, would be a prime application
of this principle.
(3) The reduction and eventual elimination of corporate income taxes as
the transition advances and the economy approaches “capitalistic balance.”82
The corporate income tax is justifiable in a mixed economy where
the wealth produced by capital must be largely distributed to labor
in order to prevent the collapse of the economy. It would not be
justifiable where 90 percent, or more, of the national income can
be distributed to the owners of capital property where its owner-
ship is widely diffused and where the national policy is to encour-
age the shift of the burden of production from labor to capital. At
the end of the transition, only personal income taxes would be lev-
ied, for only in this manner can all households be treated for tax
purposes with proportionate equality.
(4) The regulation of business corporations by government in accordance
with the principles of Capitalism. This envisages the extirpation of the
capitalistic heresy of laissez-faire. As long as government regulation
is designed to encourage the broadest diffusion of private owner-
ship of capital, to restrict government itself from owning capital,83
82 The economy approaches “capitalistic balance” as it approaches the point at
which the diffusion of private ownership of capital is so broad that the wealth
produced by capital can be fully distributed to the owners of capital.
83 Under Capitalism, the only justification for government ownership of capital
is the sheer technical physical impossibility of private ownership. The public
roads are an example. Freedom in an industrial society is dependent upon the
widely diffused private ownership of economic power (the power to produce
wealth) as a check to inevitably concentrated political power. Every attempt by
government to unite in itself political and economic power should be subjected
to this test. The frequent attempt to justify government’s engaging in the pro-
duction of wealth on the grounds that particular projects are “too large” for
private industry is absurd, as we will show.
221
and to give full effectiveness to private property in capital, the
regulation of business by government diminishes rather than in-
creases the power of political office holders. The use of political
power to regulate the economic system, so that economic power
remains widely diffused, vested in private property, and protected
in its property rights, can never endanger individual freedom.
(5) Government regulation of business corporations so that, on the one
hand, they may grow to such size as to enable them to employ fully the most
advanced techniques of production; and so that, on the other hand, they will not
become so large as to impair free competition in the markets affected by them.
As we will point out later, there is no reason to assume today that
such middle ground of corporate size does not exist in every case
except that of public utilities, i.e., industries in which free competi-
tion is not feasible for technological reasons. If and when an in-
stance is found in which efficient techniques of production cannot
be employed unless a business is of such size as to impair free
competition, such an industry has by this very fact become a public
utility. The number of such instances are few today, and there is
every reason to believe that the advance of technology will reduce
the number rather than increase it. In all cases, however, the gov-
ernment regulation of corporations should try to see that growth in
the size of a corporation is accompanied by the broadening of its
ownership.
(6) The employment by government of all reasonable and proper powers to
carry out the transition to Capitalism. When the transition has been ef-
fected, government should employ its regulatory powers to main-
tain balance between the diffusion of private ownership of capital
and the perpetual increase in the proportion of the total wealth
produced by capital. The principles which should underlie all such
regulations are (a) the protection of property; (b) the maintenance
of free competition in all markets; and (c) the discharge of the ob-
ligation of government to assure all households of the opportunity
to participate in production to an extent sufficient to provide them
with a viable income.
222
RESTORING EFFECTIVE OWNERSHIP OF CAPITAL
TO THE STOCKHOLDERS OF BUSINESS CORPORATIONS
The essence of property in productive wealth is the right to receive
its product. Legal recognition of this right would consist in the le-
gal requirement that the entire net income of a mature corporation
during or immediately after the close of each financial period be
paid out in dividends to its stockholders. Some allowances would
have to be made for the need of relatively undeveloped new corpo-
rations to plough in capital in order to survive, as well as for the
needs of any business for working capital and contingent reserves.
Failure to apply the laws of private property to the capital owned
by stockholders permits corporate managers in effect to hire capital
at a price dictated by themselves.84
The voice of the stockholder is ineffective unless he receives
the entire product of his capital and then determines, by his own
affirmative action, whether he will return any part of such earnings
to the corporation as a further investment of capital. No other
conceivable arrangement can force corporate management to jus-
tify its performance from time to time before stockholders, just as
84 That the right to receive the income of capital is the essence of property in
capital is an undisputed legal proposition. It has never been more tersely stated
than by Chief Justice Fuller of the United States Supreme Court in the case
which held unconstitutional an income tax of 2 percent, thus making necessary
the 16th Amendment to the Constitution. The Chief Justice, delivering the opin-
ion of the court, said: “But is there any distinction between the real estate itself
or its owners in respect of it and the rents or income of the real estate coming to
the owners as the natural and ordinary incident of their ownership?... As, accord-
ing to the feudal law, the whole beneficial interest in the land co nsisted in the
right to take the rents and profits, the general rule has always been, in the lan-
guage of Coke, that ‘if a man seized of land in fee by his deed granteth to an-
other the profits of those lands, to have and to hold to him and his heirs... the
whole land itself doth pass. For what is the land but the profits thereof?’... A
devise of the rents and profits or of the income of lands passes the land itself
both at law and in equity.” Pollock v. Farmers’ Loan & Trust Co., United States
Supreme Court Reports, 1895, Vol. 157, p. 429 ff.
223
holders of political office must justify theirs from time to time be-
fore the electorate.
Government without the consent of the governed is despot-
ism. Benevolent or paternalistic care of the interests of the gov-
erned does not lessen the despotism. If the governed are men, not
children, they are entitled to take care of themselves through proc-
esses of self-government in which they express their consent by
exercising a voice in their own affairs. Nothing could be more a
man’s own affairs than the disposal of his own property. For the
management of a corporate enterprise to dispose of what rightfully
belongs to its stockholders without their free, present, and affirma-
tively expressed consent is despotism, and it remains despotism no
matter how benevolent or wise management is in acting for what it
thinks to be the “best interests” of its stockholders.
In the political sphere, those elected to public office are ex-
pected to exercise the powers of government, and should be al-
lowed to do so without the interference of the electorate. In a rep-
resentative democracy, the citizens do not exercise these powers
directly. They delegate them to the men of their choice. But while
the citizens do not themselves perform the technical tasks of gov-
ernment, they do retain the ultimate power of government through
the choice of their representatives and through the constitutional
acts by which they give or withhold their approval of the policies
and conduct of the officials who hold office at their pleasure.
Analogously, those who hold the offices of management in
large corporate enterprises have, in theory at least, been selected
because of their technical competence for the tasks of manage-
ment. They should, therefore, be expected and allowed to perform
these tasks without interference from the stockholders. Corporate
management must be responsible not only for the day-to-day op-
eration of the corporation’s business, but also for long-term poli-
cies and planning which involve the future capital needs of the
corporation. But the ultimate control of the corporation should
rest with those who own it, not with those who merely run it.
224
That ultimate control, which belongs to the stockholders by
their right of property, cannot be exercised by them if they have no
power beyond saying who shall sit on the corporation’s Board of
Directors. For the stockholders to exercise ultimate control over
their property, they must also be able to say how all the wealth
produced by that property shall be disposed of. To give them such
control, which by right should be theirs, would not invade the pro-
fessional or technical sphere of management. It would simply make
management responsible to their principals, the owners, as the of-
ficers of government are responsible to their masters, the citizens.
It would reconstitute the corporation by creating it in the image of
constitutional government. Just as government with the consent of
the governed made popular sovereignty effective and barred the
way to all dictatorial usurpations of power, so management with
the consent of the owners would make private property effective in
corporations and would bar the way to all usurping alienations of
property.
Once the laws of private property are applied to the property
rights of stockholders, the power and effectiveness of the stock-
holder’s voice in corporate affairs will give him the control he
should have. The burden of explaining long-range plans and of
making a convincing case for them before stockholders will be
thrown upon management. The task of educating stockholders in
the affairs of corporations––an indispensable requirement in a so-
ciety of capitalists––will be placed upon management. Stockholders
will have the incentive to become knowledgeable about the activi-
ties of their corporations. The stockholder’s present apathy to cor-
porate communications cannot be overcome as long as he feels
that the economic effect upon him will be the same whether he
scrutinizes them meticulously or wholly disregards them. But if the
stockholder’s hand is restored to the economic throttle of the cor-
poration, his decisions will then affect the return upon his capital,
and he will be attentive.
It is hardly necessary to point out that a modification in per-
sonal income tax laws would be required if corporations are com-
pelled by law to pay to stockholders the income which their capital
225
produces. One guiding principle of such statutory amendments in
the early phase of the transition should be that the revenue of gov-
ernment ought not be increased as a result. With that kept con-
stant, the tax burden on a stockholder, after he has been made to
assume his proportionate share of the corporation’s income tax,
should not be increased.
The proposed reconstitution of the corporation is indispensa-
ble to the restoration of the rights of private property held in cor-
porate form. The restoration of such rights would go a long way
toward effecting the transition from our present mixed capitalism
to a completely capitalistic economy. Even during the transition, it
would cauterize the dangerous concentrations of irresponsible
power that are now uncontrollable growths in our economy. But in
the economy that will emerge when the transition to Capitalism is
completed, it is of the utmost importance that the corporation
should be an instrument of private property and completely re-
sponsive to the rights of property. A society of capitalists without
an effective franchise vested in the rights of property would be as
much a hollow mockery as a society in which all men are citizens
but without the rights of suffrage.
FINANCIAL EFFICIENCY IN BUSINESS CORPORATIONS
VS. TECHNICAL EFFICIENCY
The application of the laws of private property to such property in
its corporate form has other implications. At present corporations
are permitted to withhold the income due stockholders ad infinitum,
so long as it is employed in new capital formation for the corpora-
tion. In many of our greatest corporations, it is this illegitimate
power, rather than their superiority of production techniques or
management, which has catapulted them to the magnitude of com-
petition-destroying monopolies.
It is a tenet of Capitalism that technological progress must
never be impeded or slowed down. The goal of Capitalism is the
226
most efficient production of all the wealth that is needed––with the
least human toil. Such technical efficiency is desirable without qualifi-
cation or limit. Financial efficiency, however, is another matter. From
the point of view of Capitalism, the fact that the techniques and
capital of a particular corporation are superior in productiveness
does not justify management in forcing stockholders to remain
quiescent with a minute share of the income to which they are enti-
tled, while the residue is used by management to give the corpora-
tion market dominance. Financial efficiency, according to the the-
ory of Capitalism, should always be subordinated to the primary
objectives of the economy.
In acting to bring about the capitalist revolution, as well as in
regulating a completely capitalistic economy, government should
not hesitate, therefore, to prohibit corporate conduct which
thwarts the diffusion of capital ownership or which impairs market
competition, merely because the financial efficiency of the corpora-
tion would thereby be impaired. Increased financial efficiency is
generally a gain made at the expense of other participants in pro-
duction. Increased technological efficiency is a gain which reduces
toil.
Admittedly, these principles would not be as easy to administer
as they are to state. This does not, however, lessen their soundness
as principles. Practical instances of their application will be dis-
cussed later as we examine other proposals for accomplishing the
transition to Capitalism, such as the credit financing of the forma-
tion of new capital under the ownership of new capitalists.
OTHER CHANGES AFFECTING BUSINESS CORPORATIONS
In an economy in which most new capital formation has its source
in income withheld by corporations from their stockholders, cor-
porate giantism and the disappearance of free competition is a mat-
227
ter of course.85 Where it is recognized, however, that the same fi-
nancial means that are now used to finance consumption can be
used to finance new capital formation, the link between adequate
formation of new capital and the continued concentration of own-
ership of capital is broken.
We will discuss the underlying principles of this proposal in
Chapter Thirteen. But in the present connection it should be
pointed out that our mixed economy has gone so far in fostering
corporate monopolies that in the early phases of the transition to
Capitalism the program of financing new capitalists should direct a
predominant share of new capital formation into new enterprises
owned by new capitalists. The restoration of free competition re-
quires an increase in the number of competitors in hundreds of
markets.
We have called attention to the fact that the accelerated amor-
tization provisions of the federal revenue laws have been deliber-
ately used to increase the concentrated ownership of capital. Such
use impedes the transition to Capitalism. To effect that transition
accelerated amortization might be used in exactly the opposite way
to promote directly the diffused ownership of capital and to restore
competition to markets which have fallen under the control of oli-
gopolies. The same differential treatment, guided by the same eco-
nomic principles, might be employed in fixing the depletion rates
in extractive industries.
At all times, regulatory procedures designed to broaden owner-
ship of capital and to promote freely competitive markets would
have to be employed in such a manner as to give free play to the
competitive forces that weed out technologically inefficient, mis-
managed, or otherwise submarginal businesses. Such weeding out
is essential to technological advance and the reduction of toil. It is
indispensable to a healthy capitalistic economy.
85 See “Profit Margins at General Motors,” a background study by the American
Institute of Management, published in The Corporate Director, July, 1956, Vol. VI,
No. 3.
228
In disposing of war plants, in the development of atomic en-
ergy as a source of industrial power, in making military expendi-
tures, in breaking up monopolistic combinations under the anti-
trust laws, in making expenditures in those few instances where it
is proper for government to own and operate capital instruments
(such as the public roads), and in purchasing military equipment,
buildings to house public offices, supplies, etc., government should
act to promote Capitalism, not to prevent it. War plants should not
be disposed of in a manner calculated to foster increased concen-
tration of ownership or decrease market competition. Where such
plants now belong to the government, their transfer to private
ownership presents an opportunity to bring into existence new,
privately owned businesses under the ownership of new capitalists.
It seems certain that atomic energy will be the basic source of
industrial power for the production of wealth in the future. Atomic
energy can be harnessed to produce wealth with only minute con-
tributions from subtechnical and submanagerial labor. Large
amounts of capital formation will be needed to realize the potential
benefits that atomic energy holds in store for mankind.
Here is a case in which the officers of government, under our
mixed economy, are in a position to fuse their political power with
the vast economic power that is inherent in government ownership
of atomic energy plants. But under Capitalism government would
have here a magnificent opportunity to guide the development of
great wealth-producing capital instruments into widely diffused
private ownership. Any atomic plant that can be directly built and
financed by government is per se capable of being built by private
corporations owned by new capitalists, on condition that the credit fa-
cilities of government are used to assist them if private credit facilities are not
available or adequate.
In each of these instances, the policy of government, in seeking
to diffuse and broaden the ownership base and to establish free
competition, should be cautious to go no further in diverting new
capital formation away from the giant corporations than is neces-
sary to restore competitive markets and to bring about a workable
229
diffusion of ownership. Although only a minute number of stock-
holders are at the present time dependent upon the capital of these
corporations for their participation in production, the number will
grow as the transition to Capitalism is effected. An expanding
number of households will look to their ownership of equity inter-
ests in these corporations as their primary means of participating in
production and in the resultant distribution of income. Our largest
corporations have gone far beyond the size dictated by mere techno-
logical efficiency. They have long since passed the point where their
continued growth would promote technological efficiency. On the
other hand, regulation should not impair their service to their
stockholders as an effective means of participating in production.
230
13 MEASURES AIMED AT DETERRING
AN EXCESSIVE OWNERSHIP OF CAPITAL
BY INDIVIDUAL HOUSEHOLDS
INVESTMENT PREFERENCE FOR SMALL
OR NEW CAPITALISTS
We have asserted the necessity of requiring a full periodic distribu-
tion to stockholders of the net earnings (i.e., the wealth produced)
by corporations. This might be accomplished through tax deter-
rents that do not differ in principle from those provisions of the
present Revenue Code that restrict accumulations in excess of the
reasonable needs of a business.
Any such enforced payment of corporate net earnings would
have to be accompanied by great improvement in the efficiency of
investment banking practices for the marketing of new equity is-
sues. The costs of marketing security issues would have to be ma-
terially reduced, and regulations to insure fair dealing and full dis-
231
closure of relevant information would have to be made more effec-
tive.
No government efforts are of greater importance to the rights
and interests of its citizens than regulations aimed at molding the
base of private ownership to fit the state of technology and the
needs of the people for a high standard of living. There do not ap-
pear to be any insurmountable obstacles to the development of
security flotation procedures which would help to broaden the
capital base and to discourage concentration of ownership of capi-
tal.
Effective security flotation procedures during the transition pe-
riod may require the establishment of preferential opportunities for
investment by households whose aggregate capital interests are
subviable. Any study of present and past financing practices
quickly discloses that the choice investment opportunities are
available to those whose capital ownership is already concentrated.
To date, political leaders, economists, and businessmen focus their
attention on the amount of capital formation needed to furnish
desirable growth for the economy. They pay almost no attention to
the sources of the capital and the diffusion of its ownership. An
outstanding but by no means solitary example of this is the money,
amounting to billions, which the government has granted in
tax-free loans (i.e., the accelerated five-year amortization privileges)
to the largest corporations. As a result, highly concentrated owner-
ship is further intensified and freely competitive markets are im-
paired. The establishment of effective investment preferences for
new and small capital owners would be one means of accomplish-
ing the dual responsibility of all concerned to see not only that
adequate capital formation takes place, but also that the growth in
the number of households owning viable capital interests occurs at
a satisfactory rate.
We cannot explore here all of the possibilities of making rea-
sonable use of a system of investor preferences which would tend
to advance the capitalist revolution. In general, such controls
should operate through (1) preferential credit financing of the ac-
232
quisition of viable capital interests by noncapital-owning house-
holds or households with subviable capital holdings; and (2) giving
households with very large holdings of capital low investment
preferences which might limit them to investment in fixed income
bonds (e.g., the bonds of financing institutions designed to provide
the credit necessary to carry on the program of financing new capi-
talists).
To illustrate the type of investor preference we have in mind,
investments in public utility enterprises, including new atomic en-
ergy plants, would undoubtedly be rated for investment priority by
new capitalists with subviable holdings, and should be favorites for
capital-acquisition loans of types we will discuss later. The enor-
mous power needs of the future will provide the opportunity for a
vast number of new viable capital holdings. One well-informed
estimate places the amount of capital investment in power re-
sources to be required in the United States over the next twenty
years at nearly 100 billion dollars.
INCOME TAX DETERRENTS TO PERSONAL CONCENTRATION
The ownership of a large amount of productive capital is not the
only manner in which the excessive concentration of participation
in production may come about. It may also come about in a par-
ticular household through combining a very large holding of capital
with the performance of highly paid work. The combination of
ownership of a large capital estate with the performance of highly
paid managerial or professional work gives a single household the
possession of great productive power. Whether this form of con-
centration presents problems different from those of concentrated
capital ownership by itself depends upon certain factors which we
will now consider.
The economic goal of Capitalism is to shift the burden of pro-
ducing subsistence from human labor to capital instruments as far
as it is possible to do so. The state of technological advancement
233
and the standard of living which an economy sets for itself will de-
termine at any particular time the amount of subsistence work for
which there is a real demand in the economy. The more successful
an economy is in substituting the production of subsistence by
capital for its production by labor, the smaller the actual demand
for labor, whatever the given standard of living.
In terms of these relationships, we can see several things. At
the beginning of the transition to Capitalism, the proportion of
households whose only opportunity to participate in production is
through toil will be at a maximum. At the conclusion, when a bal-
anced capitalistic economy is achieved, there will certainly always
be some portion of the population who, for reasons of mental in-
competence or moral delinquency, will fail to husband their prop-
erty in capital and otherwise fail to adapt themselves to the exigen-
cies of a completely capitalistic economy. Hence there will always
be some whose only possibility of participating in production is
through the performance of toil. Aside from this, the production
of wealth will always require millions of workers, although it seems
absolutely certain that the amount of necessary toil will progres-
sively diminish in relation to the amount of wealth produced.
The government of a completely capitalistic society should do
the very opposite of promoting “full employment,” for to promote
the employment of all employables under a nonlaboristic distribu-
tion of wealth would be to make an end out of toil itself or to en-
courage individuals to make the same slavish mistake. A capitalistic
economy could countenance full employment only at a time when
methods of production are technologically so primitive that the
employment of all employables is necessary to enable it to achieve
the standard of living it desires. Even then it would seek to pro-
mote technological advance in order to correct this deplorable
condition. But if, in an advanced industrial economy, there are
households whose only opportunity to engage in production is
through the performance of toil, at a time when the demand for labor is
less than the supply of persons seeking employment, the government of a
completely capitalistic society cannot fulfill its obligation to provide
an opportunity to all to participate in production unless it inhibits the
234
particular kind of concentration that is involved in combining participation in
production as a worker with participation as the owner of a monopolistic capi-
tal estate. This kind of concentration does more than diminish the
opportunities of others to participate in production. It destroys
them.
Whatever may be determined to be a monopolistic capital
holding at a particular time, if the need for jobs is less than the
supply, the government of a completely capitalistic society should
prohibit the pre-empting of employment opportunities by those
who do not need them, to the harm and detriment of those who
do. The performance of toil for subsistence is a means to the en-
joyment of wealth. But the nature of production and distribution in
a completely capitalistic society is such that if some hoard more of
the opportunity to produce than is consistent with the participation
in production by all, whether it be through avarice, ignorance or
foolishness, then the obligation falls upon government to deter
them from doing so.
As we continue to make technological progress, the importance
of preventing this type of concentration of participation in produc-
tion will increase. As more men become holders of viable capital
estates, and as the capital formation that is concurrently taking
place represents an ever greater shift of the burden of production
from labor to capital, the greater will be the danger that those
whose only opportunity to participate in production is through la-
bor will become wards of charity as a result of the combination by
others of large capital ownership with highly paid employments.
The policy of government in this respect should be more than
regulatory. It should be educative. It is the greatest of all slanders
on humanity to think that only through the production of wealth
can men find outlets for their creative energies and impulses. This
is a falsehood that civilized society should make every effort to re-
fute. Through preventing men from adding an increment to their
income which they do not need, by doing subsistence work where their
doing so would deprive others of their only opportunity to participate in the pro-
235
duction of wealth, government can drive home a truth that all men in
industrial societies must learn.
How can government most effectively prevent the combining
of very large holdings of capital with compensation for subsistence
work, where well-paid employment opportunities are less than the
number of those whose only possibility of participation in produc-
tion is through work? Our answer to this question is no more than
a tentative suggestion. The problem is a matter of the deepest im-
portance, and the study given it should be commensurate.
It appears to us that the problem can be dealt with through a
deterrent use of taxation. Income from capital sources and income
from labor sources might be separately classified for income tax
purposes. After a household’s capital income reaches the magni-
tude of a monopolistic capital holding, any additional income it
derives from subsistence work (as distinguished from such income as
may be derived from liberal pursuits) might be subjected to a sepa-
rate progressive tax, rising––perhaps precipitously––to the level
determined necessary to discourage this type of concentration. This
might eliminate any economic incentive for those who try to com-
bine such incomes with incomes resulting from subsistence work.
One other possible form of income tax deterrent to personal
concentration should be mentioned. It should be the policy of a
completely capitalistic society to encourage the acquisition of viable
capital holdings by a maximum number of households, but at the
same time to discourage capital holdings from growing to
monopolistic size. Consequently, it would seem essential that this
policy be reflected in the establishment of personal income tax
rates. Graduated rates might be designed to rise steeply at the point
where any increase in income would represent a monopolistic capi-
tal holding.
236
14 MEASURES AIMED AT DIRECTLY
STIMULATING AN INCREASE IN THE
NUMBER OF NEW CAPITALISTS
THE PRIMARY FUNCTION OF CREDIT
IN A CAPITALISTIC SOCIETY
We have already discussed the possibility of greatly increasing the
number of new owners of capital through the indirect device of
equity-sharing. We pointed out that this could take place painlessly,
i.e., that it could be accomplished within the severe progressive
corporate income tax rates to which we are accustomed. While
there is some prospect that such corporate income taxes can be
reduced to what is required for the basic costs of government as
we approach our goal of a balance between production by capital
and diffusion of capital ownership, there is little chance of tax re-
ductions in our present mixed economy. The chances are all the
other way.
Let us now consider the possibility of creating millions of new
“financed capitalists”––men who have become acquainted with the
principles of a capitalistic economy and whose acquisition of viable
237
capital holdings has been financed with something approaching the
effectiveness of our present financing of the acquisition of con-
sumer goods. The latter has facilitated the acquisition by consum-
ers of 142 billion dollars of durable goods, nearly 250 billion dol-
lars of residential housing, 54 billion dollars in farm lands, and 35
billion dollars in farm improvements.86
The view that an orgy of production is needed to keep our
mixed capitalist economy functioning effectively is frequently
stated in terms of an economic pie. We are told that the problem is
not one of dividing up the economic pie, but rather one of making
an ever larger pie. Neither is a correct statement of the problem.
The task of a truly capitalistic society is to broaden the ownership
of the piemaking machinery and to build a vast number of new pie-
making machines that will be owned by people who do not now
own such machines.
HISTORICAL PRECEDENTS
The explanations of “how capitalists got to be capitalists,” ad-
vanced during the last two hundred years, have of necessity been
conflicting, implausible, absurd, and frequently even whimsical.
Without an explicit formulation of the theory of Capitalism, and
especially without the basic insight that capital is the major pro-
ducer of wealth in a n industrial society, any account of the distribu-
tive dynamics of Capitalism tended to be fragmentary and dis-
torted.
One of the most widely accepted of the traditional explana-
tions of how men become capitalists is that individuals by thrifty
and sacrificial savings of sums earned by toil, combined with cou-
rageous, imaginative and shrewd investment, are able to build up
86 Estimates of wealth for 1952 by R. W. Goldsmith, A Study of Saving in the
United States (Princeton, N. J.: Princeton University Press, 1956), Vol. 111, Table
W-1.
238
capital holdings.87 This is certainly a correct explanation of how
many viable capital fortunes were started. But the explanation is
valid only for the early beginnings of such fortunes; for with the
tendency of capital to accumulate in a geometric progression, the
period of sacrificial frugality is soon over. Furthermore, this tradi-
tional explanation has no application to the great number and fre-
quently vast size of the capital fortunes built upon inheritances,
family gifts, transfers through marriage, and other ways of acquir-
ing an initial equity holding without any frugality or postponement
of consumer satisfactions.
There are other explanations of how men become owners of
substantial capital holdings. They range from one extreme of
claiming that the successful capitalist is always a man of superior
intelligence, if not a genius or wizard, to the opposite extreme of
saying, as Julius Rosenwald did, that 95 percent of all large fortunes
were the result of luck.8879
One thing is certain: not only has capital always been a pro-
ducer of wealth, but its productiveness has evolved so far and risen
so high in relation to that of labor that it is now the primary pro-
ducer of wealth in an industrial society. Where private property in
capital was fully respected as under the system of primitive capital-
ism, and even where it is respected only to some degree as in our
present mixed capitalism, substantially all capital formation out of
savings has taken place under the ownership of the existing pro-
87 For example, the Invest-In-America Committee, sponsored by the investment
banking fraternity, whose motto is “Invest in American for more and better jobs,”
states in its 1957 campaign propaganda: “A million new jobs a year call for at
least $14,000 new capital investment per job—fourteen billion dollars per year!
And at least another twenty billion dollars a year will be needed to maintain the
plants and machinery providing the sixty-six million present jobs. Where is the
money coming from? From the same sources of capital that have provided it in the past...
savings in the form of retained earnings of corporations and the savings of the
American people… your savings, we hope...” (Italics added.)
88 See Gustave Myers, The Ending of Hereditary American Fortunes, New York, 1939:
p. 236, Note 8.
239
prietors of capital. The reasoning behind this statement can be
simply stated. If economic values, including the values of the re-
spective contributions of capital and labor to production, are com-
petitively determined, then the large incomes and the substantial
savings will be those of the owners of capital.
So completely accurate is this statement of the relationship be-
tween the high wealth-producing power of capital and the owner-
ship of new capital formation arising out of savings, that it has held
in spite of the enormously discriminatory effect of the double
graduated income taxes. In spite of the corporate income tax,
which falls only upon the wealth produced by capital, and the
graduated personal income tax, which falls much more severely
upon capital incomes (because they are the largest incomes) than
upon labor incomes, the bulk of new capital currently formed out
of personal and business savings is acquired by the present owners
of capital.
In a competitive economy, the acquisition of capital through
savings from wages and salaries is wholly inadequate to maintain
the balance between the growth in the number of capital owners
and the growth in the productive power of capital. The power of
labor to produce wealth is small. In the absence of monopolisti-
cally controlled wage levels, the productive power of labor is
wholly inadequate to support a standard of living anywhere ap-
proaching that which prevails in the United States today. Even